docs/home/index.md, before:

---
title: Home
icon: lucide/home
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

* **`ctx` is not a prompt**.
* **`ctx` is version-controlled cognitive state**.

`ctx` is the persistence layer for human–AI reasoning.

*Deterministic. Git-native. Human-readable. Local-first*.

**Start here**. 

Learn what `ctx` does, set it up, and run your first session.

---

### [About ctx](about.md)

What `ctx` is, how it works, and why **persistent context
changes** how you work with AI.

---

### [Is It Right for Me?](is-ctx-right.md)

Good fit, not-so-good fit, and a **5-minute trial**
to find out for yourself.

---

### [Community](community.md)

We are the builders who care about **durable** context.<br />
Join the community. Hang out in IRC. Star `ctx` on GitHub.

---

### [Contributing](contributing.md)

**Development setup**, project layout, and pull request process.

---

### [Getting Started](getting-started.md)

Install the **binary**, set up the **plugin**, and **verify** it works.

---

### [Your First Session](first-session.md)

**Step-by-step** walkthrough from `ctx init` to verified recall.

---

### [Common Workflows](common-workflows.md)

Day-to-day commands for **tracking** context, **checking** health,
and browsing **history**.

---

### [Context Files](context-files.md)

What each `.context/` file does. What's their **purpose**.
How do we best **leverage** them.

---

### [Configuration](configuration.md)

Flexible **configuration**: `.ctxrc`, environment variables, and CLI flags.

---

### [Prompting Guide](prompting-guide.md)

**Effective prompts** for AI sessions with `ctx`.

Commit message:

Multi-workstream consolidation: asset reorg, session pause, why command, design invariants, docs refresh
Asset templates reorganized into subdirectories (claude/, context/, project/).
New features: session pause/resume, ctx why, event log foundation, specs nudge hook.
System hooks refactored with shared state and message helpers.
Design invariants page added to Reference section (ideas/ → docs/reference/).
Completed specs moved to specs/future-complete/. Site rebuilt with nav updates.
Notify, rc, and config packages extended for new capabilities.

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/home/index.md, after:

---
title: Home
icon: lucide/home
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

* **`ctx` is not a prompt**.
* **`ctx` is version-controlled cognitive state**.

`ctx` is the persistence layer for human–AI reasoning.

*Deterministic. Git-native. Human-readable. Local-first*.

**Start here**. 

Learn what `ctx` does, set it up, and run your first session.

!!! warning "Pre-1.0 — Moving Fast"
    `ctx` is under active development. The documentation tracks the
    **development branch**, not the latest release — some features described
    here may not exist in the binary you have installed.

    Expect rough edges. If something is missing or broken,
    [open an issue](https://github.com/AgenticManifold/ctx/issues).

---

### [About ctx](about.md)

What `ctx` is, how it works, and why **persistent context
changes** how you work with AI.

---

### [Is It Right for Me?](is-ctx-right.md)

Good fit, not-so-good fit, and a **5-minute trial**
to find out for yourself.

---

### [Community](community.md)

We are the builders who care about **durable** context.<br />
Join the community. Hang out in IRC. Star `ctx` on GitHub.

---

### [Contributing](contributing.md)

**Development setup**, project layout, and pull request process.

---

### [Getting Started](getting-started.md)

Install the **binary**, set up the **plugin**, and **verify** it works.

---

### [Your First Session](first-session.md)

**Step-by-step** walkthrough from `ctx init` to verified recall.

---

### [Common Workflows](common-workflows.md)

Day-to-day commands for **tracking** context, **checking** health,
and browsing **history**.

---

### [Context Files](context-files.md)

What each `.context/` file does. What's their **purpose**.
How do we best **leverage** them.

---

### [Configuration](configuration.md)

Flexible **configuration**: `.ctxrc`, environment variables, and CLI flags.

---

### [Prompting Guide](prompting-guide.md)

**Effective prompts** for AI sessions with `ctx`.
