internal/assets/claude/skills/ctx-recall/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: ctx-recall
description: "Browse session history. Use when referencing past discussions or finding context from previous work."
allowed-tools: Bash(ctx:*)
---

Browse, inspect, and export AI session history.

## When to Use

- When the user asks "what did we do last time?" or references
  a past discussion
- When looking for context from previous work sessions
- When exporting sessions to the journal for enrichment
- When searching for a specific session by topic, date, or ID

## When NOT to Use

- When the user just wants current context (use `/ctx-status`
  or `/ctx-agent` instead)
- When session data is already loaded in context (no need to
  re-fetch)
- For modifying session content (recall is read-only; edit
  journal files directly)

## Usage Examples

```text
/ctx-recall
/ctx-recall list --limit 5
/ctx-recall show <slug-or-id>
/ctx-recall export --all
```

## Subcommands

### `ctx recall list`

List recent sessions, newest first.

| Flag             | Short | Default | Purpose                              |
|------------------|-------|---------|--------------------------------------|
| `--limit`        | `-n`  | 20      | Maximum sessions to show             |
| `--project`      | `-p`  | ""      | Filter by project name               |
| `--tool`         | `-t`  | ""      | Filter by tool (e.g., "claude-code") |
| `--all-projects` |       | false   | Include all projects                 |

Output per session: slug, short ID, project, branch, time,
duration, turn count, token count, first message preview.

### `ctx recall show`

Show details of a specific session.

| Flag              | Default | Purpose                          |
|-------------------|---------|----------------------------------|
| `--latest`        | false   | Show the most recent session     |
| `--full`          | false   | Full conversation (not preview)  |
| `--all-projects`  | false   | Search across all projects       |

Accepts a session identifier: full UUID, partial UUID prefix,
or slug name. Use `--latest` if no ID is given.

Default output shows metadata and the first 5 user messages.
Use `--full` for the complete conversation.

### `ctx recall export`

Export sessions to the journal directory as markdown.

| Flag                  | Default | Purpose                                           |
|-----------------------|---------|---------------------------------------------------|
| `--all`               | false   | Export all sessions (only new files by default)     |
| `--all-projects`      | false   | Include all projects                                |
| `--regenerate`        | false   | Re-export existing files (preserves frontmatter)    |
| `--keep-frontmatter`  | true    | Preserve enriched YAML frontmatter during regen     |
| `--yes`, `-y`         | false   | Skip confirmation prompt                            |
| `--dry-run`           | false   | Preview what would be exported                      |

Accepts a session ID (always writes), or `--all` to export
everything (safe by default — only new sessions, existing
files skipped). Use `--regenerate` with `--all` to re-export
existing files; YAML frontmatter is preserved by default.
Use `--keep-frontmatter=false` to discard enriched frontmatter.

Locked entries (via `ctx recall lock`) are always skipped.

Large sessions (>200 messages) are automatically split into
parts with navigation links between them.

### `ctx recall lock`

Protect journal entries from export regeneration.

```bash
ctx recall lock <pattern>     # Lock matching entries
ctx recall lock --all         # Lock all entries
```

### `ctx recall unlock`

Remove lock protection from journal entries.

```bash
ctx recall unlock <pattern>   # Unlock matching entries
ctx recall unlock --all       # Unlock all entries
```

## Data Source

Sessions are read from `~/.claude/projects/` (Claude Code
JSONL files). The system auto-detects and parses session files;
only the current project's sessions are shown by default.

## Process

1. **Determine intent**: does the user want to list, inspect,
   or export?
2. **Run the appropriate subcommand** with relevant flags
3. **Summarize results**: for `list`, highlight notable sessions;
   for `show`, summarize key points; for `export`, report what
   was written and suggest next steps (normalize, enrich)

## Typical Workflows

**"What did we work on recently?"**
```bash
ctx recall list --limit 5
```

**"Show me that session about authentication"**
```bash
ctx recall list --project auth
# then with the slug or ID from the list:
ctx recall show <slug>
```

**"Export everything to the journal"**
```bash
ctx recall export --all
```
This only exports new sessions — existing files are skipped.
Then suggest enrichment (`/ctx-journal-enrich-all`) as a next step.

**"Re-export sessions after a format improvement"**
```bash
ctx recall export --all --regenerate -y
```

## Quality Checklist

Before reporting results, verify:
- [ ] Used the right subcommand for the user's intent
- [ ] Applied filters if the user mentioned a project, date,
      or topic
- [ ] For export, reminded the user about the normalize/enrich
      pipeline as next steps
- [ ] Used `--all` for bulk export (safe — only new sessions)
- [ ] Suggested `--dry-run` when user seems uncertain
- [ ] Only used `--regenerate` when explicitly needed

Commit message:

Absorb hack scripts into Go, promote 6 skills to bundled, add config/reindex subcommands
Hack script absorption: replace backup-context.sh, backup-global.sh,
ctxrc-swap.sh, context-watch.sh, start-dogfood.sh with native Go
subcommands (ctx system backup, ctx config switch). Remove tools/
embed directory and ListTools/Tool functions from assets.

Skill promotion: move _ctx-brainstorm, _ctx-check-links,
_ctx-sanitize-permissions, _ctx-skill-creator, _ctx-spec, _ctx-verify
from .claude/skills/ (project-local) to internal/assets/claude/skills/
(bundled in binary, deployed on ctx init).

New subcommands: ctx config (switch/status), ctx reindex (decisions/
learnings index regeneration), ctx system backup (tar+gzip to SMB).

Also: plugin.go extraction from initialize, keypath config helpers,
migrate_test coverage, doctor/pad/system refinements, docs overhaul
across 20+ pages, context file updates.

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <jose@ctx.ist>

internal/assets/claude/skills/ctx-recall/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: ctx-recall
description: "Browse session history. Use when referencing past discussions or finding context from previous work."
allowed-tools: Bash(ctx:*)
---

Browse, inspect, and export AI session history.

## When to Use

- When the user asks "what did we do last time?" or references
  a past discussion
- When looking for context from previous work sessions
- When exporting sessions to the journal for enrichment
- When searching for a specific session by topic, date, or ID

## When NOT to Use

- When the user just wants current context (use `/ctx-status`
  or `/ctx-agent` instead)
- When session data is already loaded in context (no need to
  re-fetch)
- For modifying session content (recall is read-only; edit
  journal files directly)

## Usage Examples

```text
/ctx-recall
/ctx-recall list --limit 5
/ctx-recall show <slug-or-id>
/ctx-recall export --all
```

## Subcommands

### `ctx recall list`

List recent sessions, newest first.

| Flag             | Short | Default | Purpose                              |
|------------------|-------|---------|--------------------------------------|
| `--limit`        | `-n`  | 20      | Maximum sessions to show             |
| `--project`      | `-p`  | ""      | Filter by project name               |
| `--tool`         | `-t`  | ""      | Filter by tool (e.g., "claude-code") |
| `--all-projects` |       | false   | Include all projects                 |

Output per session: slug, short ID, project, branch, time,
duration, turn count, token count, first message preview.

### `ctx recall show`

Show details of a specific session.

| Flag              | Default | Purpose                          |
|-------------------|---------|----------------------------------|
| `--latest`        | false   | Show the most recent session     |
| `--full`          | false   | Full conversation (not preview)  |
| `--all-projects`  | false   | Search across all projects       |

Accepts a session identifier: full UUID, partial UUID prefix,
or slug name. Use `--latest` if no ID is given.

Default output shows metadata and the first 5 user messages.
Use `--full` for the complete conversation.

### `ctx recall export`

Export sessions to the journal directory as markdown.

| Flag                  | Default | Purpose                                           |
|-----------------------|---------|---------------------------------------------------|
| `--all`               | false   | Export all sessions (only new files by default)     |
| `--all-projects`      | false   | Include all projects                                |
| `--regenerate`        | false   | Re-export existing files (preserves frontmatter)    |
| `--keep-frontmatter`  | true    | Preserve enriched YAML frontmatter during regen     |
| `--yes`, `-y`         | false   | Skip confirmation prompt                            |
| `--dry-run`           | false   | Preview what would be exported                      |

Accepts a session ID (always writes), or `--all` to export
everything (safe by default — only new sessions, existing
files skipped). Use `--regenerate` with `--all` to re-export
existing files; YAML frontmatter is preserved by default.
Use `--keep-frontmatter=false` to discard enriched frontmatter.

Locked entries (via `ctx recall lock`) are always skipped.

Large sessions (>200 messages) are automatically split into
parts with navigation links between them.

### `ctx recall lock`

Protect journal entries from export regeneration.

```bash
ctx recall lock <pattern>     # Lock matching entries
ctx recall lock --all         # Lock all entries
```

### `ctx recall unlock`

Remove lock protection from journal entries.

```bash
ctx recall unlock <pattern>   # Unlock matching entries
ctx recall unlock --all       # Unlock all entries
```

### `ctx recall sync`

Sync lock state from journal frontmatter to `.state.json`.

```bash
ctx recall sync
```

Scans all journal markdowns and updates `.state.json` to match
each file's frontmatter. Files with `locked: true` in frontmatter
are marked locked in state; files without a `locked:` line have
their lock cleared. This is the inverse of `ctx recall lock`:
frontmatter drives state instead of state driving frontmatter.
Useful after batch enrichment where you add `locked: true` to
frontmatter manually.

## Data Source

Sessions are read from `~/.claude/projects/` (Claude Code
JSONL files). The system auto-detects and parses session files;
only the current project's sessions are shown by default.

## Process

1. **Determine intent**: does the user want to list, inspect,
   or export?
2. **Run the appropriate subcommand** with relevant flags
3. **Summarize results**: for `list`, highlight notable sessions;
   for `show`, summarize key points; for `export`, report what
   was written and suggest next steps (normalize, enrich)

## Typical Workflows

**"What did we work on recently?"**
```bash
ctx recall list --limit 5
```

**"Show me that session about authentication"**
```bash
ctx recall list --project auth
# then with the slug or ID from the list:
ctx recall show <slug>
```

**"Export everything to the journal"**
```bash
ctx recall export --all
```
This only exports new sessions — existing files are skipped.
Then suggest enrichment (`/ctx-journal-enrich-all`) as a next step.

**"Re-export sessions after a format improvement"**
```bash
ctx recall export --all --regenerate -y
```

## Quality Checklist

Before reporting results, verify:
- [ ] Used the right subcommand for the user's intent
- [ ] Applied filters if the user mentioned a project, date,
      or topic
- [ ] For export, reminded the user about the normalize/enrich
      pipeline as next steps
- [ ] Used `--all` for bulk export (safe — only new sessions)
- [ ] Suggested `--dry-run` when user seems uncertain
- [ ] Only used `--regenerate` when explicitly needed
