docs/blog/2026-02-03-the-attention-budget.md, before:

---
title: "The Attention Budget: Why Your AI Forgets What You Just Told It"
date: 2026-02-03
author: Jose Alekhinne
reviewed_and_finalized: true
topics:
  - attention mechanics
  - context engineering
  - progressive disclosure
  - ctx primitives
  - token budgets
---

# The Attention Budget

!!! note "Update (2026-02-11)"
    As of `v0.4.0`, `ctx` consolidated sessions into the journal mechanism.

    References to `.context/sessions/` in this post reflect the
    architecture at the time of writing. Session history is now accessed
    via `ctx recall` and stored in `.context/journal/`.

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

## Why Your AI Forgets What You Just Told It

*Jose Alekhinne / 2026-02-03*

!!! question "Ever Wondered Why AI Gets Worse the Longer You Talk?"
    You paste a 2000-line file, explain the bug in detail, provide three
    examples...

    ...and the AI still suggests a fix that ignores half of what you said.

This isn't a bug. It is **physics**.

Understanding that single fact shaped every design decision behind `ctx`.

## The Finite Resource Nobody Talks About

Here's something that took me too long to internalize: **context is not free**.

Every token you send to an AI model consumes a **finite** resource I call the
**attention budget**.

**Attention budget is real**.

The model doesn't just read tokens; it forms relationships
between them: 

For `n` tokens, that's roughly `n^2` relationships. 

**Double the context, and the computation quadruples**.

But the more important constraint isn't cost: It's **attention density**.

!!! info "Attention Density"
    **Attention density** is how much focus each token receives relative to all
    other tokens in the context window.

As context grows, attention density drops: Each token gets a **smaller slice**
of the model's focus. Nothing is ignored; but everything becomes **blurrier**.

Think of it like a **flashlight**: In a small room, it illuminates everything
clearly. In a warehouse, it becomes a dim glow that barely reaches the corners.

This is why `ctx agent` has an explicit `--budget` flag:

```bash
ctx agent --budget 4000 # Force prioritization
ctx agent --budget 8000 # More context, lower attention density
```

The budget isn't just about cost: It's about **preserving signal**.

## The Middle Gets Lost

This one surprised me.

Research shows that transformer-based models tend to attend more strongly to
the **beginning** and **end** of a context window than to its middle (*a
phenomenon often called 
"[lost in the middle](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172)"*)[^1].

[^1]: Liu et al., "Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts," *Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, vol. 12, pp. 157–173, 2023.

**Positional anchors matter, and the middle has fewer of them**.

In practice, this means that information placed "*somewhere in the middle*"
is statistically less salient, even if it's important.

`ctx` orders context files by **logical progression**: What the agent needs to
know before it can understand the next thing:

1. `CONSTITUTION.md`: Constraints before action.
2. `TASKS.md`: Focus before patterns.
3. `CONVENTIONS.md`: How to write before where to write.
4. `ARCHITECTURE.md`: Structure before history.
5. `DECISIONS.md`: Past choices before gotchas.
6. `LEARNINGS.md`: Lessons before terminology.
7. `GLOSSARY.md`: Reference material.
8. `AGENT_PLAYBOOK.md`: Meta instructions last.

This ordering is about **logical dependencies**, not attention engineering.
But it happens to be **attention-friendly** too:

The files that matter most—**CONSTITUTION**, **TASKS**, **CONVENTIONS**—land
at the **beginning** of the context window, where attention is strongest.

Reference material like **GLOSSARY** sits in the middle, where lower salience
is acceptable.

And **AGENT_PLAYBOOK**, the operating manual for the context system itself, sits
at the **end**, also outside the "*lost in the middle*" zone. The agent reads
*what* to work with before learning *how* the system works.

This is `ctx`'s first primitive: **hierarchical importance**.

**Not all context is equal**.

## `ctx` Primitives

`ctx` is built on four primitives that directly address the **attention
budget** problem.

### Primitive 1: Separation of Concerns

Instead of a single mega-document, `ctx` uses **separate files for separate
purposes**:

| File              | Purpose               | Load When                 |
|-------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| CONSTITUTION.md   | Inviolable rules      | Always                    |
| TASKS.md          | Current work          | Session start             |
| CONVENTIONS.md    | How to write code     | Before coding             |
| ARCHITECTURE.md   | System structure      | Before making changes     |
| DECISIONS.md      | Architectural choices | When questioning approach |
| LEARNINGS.md      | Gotchas               | When stuck                |
| GLOSSARY.md       | Domain terminology    | When clarifying terms     |
| AGENT_PLAYBOOK.md | Operating manual      | Session start             |
| sessions/         | Deep history          | On demand                 |
| journal/          | Session journal       | On demand                 |

This isn't just "*organization*": It is **progressive disclosure**.

Load only what's relevant to the task at hand. Preserve attention density.

### Primitive 2: Explicit Budgets

The `--budget` flag forces a choice:

```bash
ctx agent --budget 4000
```

Here is a sample allocation:

```
Constitution: ~200 tokens (never truncated)
Tasks: ~500 tokens (current phase)
Conventions: ~800 tokens (key patterns)
Recent decisions: ~400 tokens (last 3)
…budget exhausted, stop loading
```

The constraint is the feature: It enforces ruthless prioritization.

### Primitive 3: Indexes Over Full Content

`DECISIONS.md` and `LEARNINGS.md` both include index sections:

```markdown
<!-- INDEX:START -->
| Date       | Decision                            |
|------------|-------------------------------------|
| 2026-01-15 | Use PostgreSQL for primary database |
| 2026-01-20 | Adopt Cobra for CLI framework       |
<!-- INDEX:END -->
```

An AI agent can scan ~50 tokens of index and decide which 
200-token entries are worth loading.

This is **just-in-time context**.

References are cheaper than the full text.

### Primitive 4: Filesystem as Navigation

`ctx` uses the filesystem itself as a context structure:

```
.context/
├── CONSTITUTION.md
├── TASKS.md
├── sessions/
│   ├── 2026-01-15-*.md
│   └── 2026-01-20-*.md
└── archive/
    └── tasks-2026-01.md
```

The AI doesn't need every session loaded;
it needs to know **where to look**.

```bash
ls .context/sessions/
cat .context/sessions/2026-01-20-auth-discussion.md
```

File names, timestamps, and directories encode relevance.

**Navigation is cheaper than loading**.

## Progressive Disclosure in Practice

The naive approach to context is dumping everything upfront:

> "Here's my entire codebase, all my documentation, every decision I've ever
> made. Now help me fix this typo 🙏."

This is an **antipattern**.

!!! warning "Antipattern: Context Hoarding"
    Dumping everything "*just in case*" will silently destroy the **attention 
    density**.

`ctx` takes the opposite approach:

```bash
ctx status                      # Quick overview (~100 tokens)
ctx agent --budget 4000         # Typical session
cat .context/sessions/...       # Deep dive when needed
```

| Command                   | Tokens | Use Case      |
|---------------------------|--------|---------------|
| `ctx status`              | ~100   | Human glance  |
| `ctx agent --budget 4000` | 4000   | Normal work   |
| `ctx agent --budget 8000` | 8000   | Complex tasks |
| Full session read         | 10000+ | Investigation |

Summaries **first**. Details: **on demand**.

## Quality Over Quantity

Here is the counterintuitive part: **more context can make AI worse**.

Extra tokens add noise, not clarity:

* Hallucinated connections increase.
* Signal per token drops.

The goal isn't maximum context: It is **maximum signal per token**.

This principle drives several `ctx` features:

| Design Choice    | Rationale                 |
|------------------|---------------------------|
| Separate files   | Load only what's relevant |
| Explicit budgets | Enforce prioritization    |
| Index sections   | Cheap scanning            |
| Task archiving   | Keep active context clean |
| `ctx compact`    | Periodic noise reduction  |

Completed work isn't deleted: It is moved somewhere cold.

## Designing for Degradation

Here is the uncomfortable truth:

**Context will degrade.**

Long sessions stretch attention thin. Important details fade.

The real question isn't how to prevent degradation, 
but how to **design for it**.

`ctx`'s answer is **persistence**:

**Persist early. Persist often.**

The `AGENT_PLAYBOOK` asks:

> "If this session ended right now, would the next one know what happened?"

Capture learnings as they occur:

```bash
ctx add learning "JWT tokens require explicit cache invalidation" \
  --context "Debugging auth failures" \
  --lesson "Token refresh doesn't clear old tokens" \
  --application "Always invalidate cache on refresh"
```

**Structure beats prose**: Bullet points survive compression.

Headings remain scannable. Tables pack density.

And above all: **single source of truth**.

**Reference** decisions; **don't duplicate** them.

## The `ctx` Philosophy

!!! info "Context as Infrastructure"
    `ctx` is not a prompt: It is **infrastructure**.

    `ctx` creates versioned files that persist across time and sessions.

The attention budget is fixed. You can't expand it.

But you can **spend it wisely**:

1. Hierarchical importance
2. Progressive disclosure
3. Explicit budgets
4. Indexes over full content
5. Filesystem as structure

This is why `ctx` exists: **not** to cram more context into AI sessions,
**but** to curate the *right* context for each moment.

## The Mental Model

I now approach every AI interaction with one question:

> "*Given a fixed attention budget, what's the highest-signal thing I can load?*"

Not "*how do I explain everything*," but "*what's the minimum that matters*."

That shift (*from abundance to curation*) is the difference between
frustrating sessions and **productive** ones.

----

**Spend your tokens wisely**.

Your AI will thank you.

---

*See also: [Context as Infrastructure](2026-02-17-context-as-infrastructure.md)
that's the architectural companion to this post, explaining how to structure
the context that this post teaches you to budget.*

*See also: [Code Is Cheap. Judgment Is Not.](2026-02-17-code-is-cheap-judgment-is-not.md)
that explains why curation (the human skill this post describes) is the bottleneck
that AI cannot solve, and the thread that connects every post in this
blog.*

Commit message:

feat: smart retrieval — budget-aware ctx agent with scoring
Make ctx agent --budget actually control content selection instead of
being cosmetic. Entries are now scored by recency and task relevance,
with tier-based budget allocation and graceful degradation.

Key changes:
- LEARNINGS.md now included in agent packets (was entirely excluded)
- Decisions include full body (was title-only, last 3)
- Conventions no longer capped at 5
- Entries scored: recency (7d/30d/90d brackets) + task keyword overlap
- Superseded entries excluded, overflow gets title-only summaries
- Fix: all ctx commands now output to stdout (Cobra defaults to stderr)
- Docs updated across cli-reference, integrations, first-session,
  hook-output-patterns, and 3 blog posts (2>/dev/null → >/dev/null)

Ref: https://github.com/ActiveMemory/ctx/issues/19 (Phase 1)
Spec: specs/smart-retrieval.md

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/blog/2026-02-03-the-attention-budget.md, after:

---
title: "The Attention Budget: Why Your AI Forgets What You Just Told It"
date: 2026-02-03
author: Jose Alekhinne
reviewed_and_finalized: true
topics:
  - attention mechanics
  - context engineering
  - progressive disclosure
  - ctx primitives
  - token budgets
---

# The Attention Budget

!!! note "Update (2026-02-11)"
    As of `v0.4.0`, `ctx` consolidated sessions into the journal mechanism.

    References to `.context/sessions/` in this post reflect the
    architecture at the time of writing. Session history is now accessed
    via `ctx recall` and stored in `.context/journal/`.

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

## Why Your AI Forgets What You Just Told It

*Jose Alekhinne / 2026-02-03*

!!! question "Ever Wondered Why AI Gets Worse the Longer You Talk?"
    You paste a 2000-line file, explain the bug in detail, provide three
    examples...

    ...and the AI still suggests a fix that ignores half of what you said.

This isn't a bug. It is **physics**.

Understanding that single fact shaped every design decision behind `ctx`.

## The Finite Resource Nobody Talks About

Here's something that took me too long to internalize: **context is not free**.

Every token you send to an AI model consumes a **finite** resource I call the
**attention budget**.

**Attention budget is real**.

The model doesn't just read tokens; it forms relationships
between them: 

For `n` tokens, that's roughly `n^2` relationships. 

**Double the context, and the computation quadruples**.

But the more important constraint isn't cost: It's **attention density**.

!!! info "Attention Density"
    **Attention density** is how much focus each token receives relative to all
    other tokens in the context window.

As context grows, attention density drops: Each token gets a **smaller slice**
of the model's focus. Nothing is ignored; but everything becomes **blurrier**.

Think of it like a **flashlight**: In a small room, it illuminates everything
clearly. In a warehouse, it becomes a dim glow that barely reaches the corners.

This is why `ctx agent` has an explicit `--budget` flag:

```bash
ctx agent --budget 4000 # Force prioritization
ctx agent --budget 8000 # More context, lower attention density
```

The budget isn't just about cost: It's about **preserving signal**.

## The Middle Gets Lost

This one surprised me.

Research shows that transformer-based models tend to attend more strongly to
the **beginning** and **end** of a context window than to its middle (*a
phenomenon often called 
"[lost in the middle](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172)"*)[^1].

[^1]: Liu et al., "Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts," *Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics*, vol. 12, pp. 157–173, 2023.

**Positional anchors matter, and the middle has fewer of them**.

In practice, this means that information placed "*somewhere in the middle*"
is statistically less salient, even if it's important.

`ctx` orders context files by **logical progression**: What the agent needs to
know before it can understand the next thing:

1. `CONSTITUTION.md`: Constraints before action.
2. `TASKS.md`: Focus before patterns.
3. `CONVENTIONS.md`: How to write before where to write.
4. `ARCHITECTURE.md`: Structure before history.
5. `DECISIONS.md`: Past choices before gotchas.
6. `LEARNINGS.md`: Lessons before terminology.
7. `GLOSSARY.md`: Reference material.
8. `AGENT_PLAYBOOK.md`: Meta instructions last.

This ordering is about **logical dependencies**, not attention engineering.
But it happens to be **attention-friendly** too:

The files that matter most—**CONSTITUTION**, **TASKS**, **CONVENTIONS**—land
at the **beginning** of the context window, where attention is strongest.

Reference material like **GLOSSARY** sits in the middle, where lower salience
is acceptable.

And **AGENT_PLAYBOOK**, the operating manual for the context system itself, sits
at the **end**, also outside the "*lost in the middle*" zone. The agent reads
*what* to work with before learning *how* the system works.

This is `ctx`'s first primitive: **hierarchical importance**.

**Not all context is equal**.

## `ctx` Primitives

`ctx` is built on four primitives that directly address the **attention
budget** problem.

### Primitive 1: Separation of Concerns

Instead of a single mega-document, `ctx` uses **separate files for separate
purposes**:

| File              | Purpose               | Load When                 |
|-------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| CONSTITUTION.md   | Inviolable rules      | Always                    |
| TASKS.md          | Current work          | Session start             |
| CONVENTIONS.md    | How to write code     | Before coding             |
| ARCHITECTURE.md   | System structure      | Before making changes     |
| DECISIONS.md      | Architectural choices | When questioning approach |
| LEARNINGS.md      | Gotchas               | When stuck                |
| GLOSSARY.md       | Domain terminology    | When clarifying terms     |
| AGENT_PLAYBOOK.md | Operating manual      | Session start             |
| sessions/         | Deep history          | On demand                 |
| journal/          | Session journal       | On demand                 |

This isn't just "*organization*": It is **progressive disclosure**.

Load only what's relevant to the task at hand. Preserve attention density.

### Primitive 2: Explicit Budgets

The `--budget` flag forces a choice:

```bash
ctx agent --budget 4000
```

Here is a sample allocation:

```
Constitution: ~200 tokens (never truncated)
Tasks: ~500 tokens (current phase, up to 40% of budget)
Conventions: ~800 tokens (all items, up to 20% of budget)
Decisions: ~400 tokens (scored by recency and task relevance)
Learnings: ~300 tokens (scored by recency and task relevance)
Also noted: ~100 tokens (title-only summaries for overflow)
```

The constraint is the feature: It enforces ruthless prioritization.

### Primitive 3: Indexes Over Full Content

`DECISIONS.md` and `LEARNINGS.md` both include index sections:

```markdown
<!-- INDEX:START -->
| Date       | Decision                            |
|------------|-------------------------------------|
| 2026-01-15 | Use PostgreSQL for primary database |
| 2026-01-20 | Adopt Cobra for CLI framework       |
<!-- INDEX:END -->
```

An AI agent can scan ~50 tokens of index and decide which 
200-token entries are worth loading.

This is **just-in-time context**.

References are cheaper than the full text.

### Primitive 4: Filesystem as Navigation

`ctx` uses the filesystem itself as a context structure:

```
.context/
├── CONSTITUTION.md
├── TASKS.md
├── sessions/
│   ├── 2026-01-15-*.md
│   └── 2026-01-20-*.md
└── archive/
    └── tasks-2026-01.md
```

The AI doesn't need every session loaded;
it needs to know **where to look**.

```bash
ls .context/sessions/
cat .context/sessions/2026-01-20-auth-discussion.md
```

File names, timestamps, and directories encode relevance.

**Navigation is cheaper than loading**.

## Progressive Disclosure in Practice

The naive approach to context is dumping everything upfront:

> "Here's my entire codebase, all my documentation, every decision I've ever
> made. Now help me fix this typo 🙏."

This is an **antipattern**.

!!! warning "Antipattern: Context Hoarding"
    Dumping everything "*just in case*" will silently destroy the **attention 
    density**.

`ctx` takes the opposite approach:

```bash
ctx status                      # Quick overview (~100 tokens)
ctx agent --budget 4000         # Typical session
cat .context/sessions/...       # Deep dive when needed
```

| Command                   | Tokens | Use Case      |
|---------------------------|--------|---------------|
| `ctx status`              | ~100   | Human glance  |
| `ctx agent --budget 4000` | 4000   | Normal work   |
| `ctx agent --budget 8000` | 8000   | Complex tasks |
| Full session read         | 10000+ | Investigation |

Summaries **first**. Details: **on demand**.

## Quality Over Quantity

Here is the counterintuitive part: **more context can make AI worse**.

Extra tokens add noise, not clarity:

* Hallucinated connections increase.
* Signal per token drops.

The goal isn't maximum context: It is **maximum signal per token**.

This principle drives several `ctx` features:

| Design Choice    | Rationale                 |
|------------------|---------------------------|
| Separate files   | Load only what's relevant |
| Explicit budgets | Enforce prioritization    |
| Index sections   | Cheap scanning            |
| Task archiving   | Keep active context clean |
| `ctx compact`    | Periodic noise reduction  |

Completed work isn't deleted: It is moved somewhere cold.

## Designing for Degradation

Here is the uncomfortable truth:

**Context will degrade.**

Long sessions stretch attention thin. Important details fade.

The real question isn't how to prevent degradation, 
but how to **design for it**.

`ctx`'s answer is **persistence**:

**Persist early. Persist often.**

The `AGENT_PLAYBOOK` asks:

> "If this session ended right now, would the next one know what happened?"

Capture learnings as they occur:

```bash
ctx add learning "JWT tokens require explicit cache invalidation" \
  --context "Debugging auth failures" \
  --lesson "Token refresh doesn't clear old tokens" \
  --application "Always invalidate cache on refresh"
```

**Structure beats prose**: Bullet points survive compression.

Headings remain scannable. Tables pack density.

And above all: **single source of truth**.

**Reference** decisions; **don't duplicate** them.

## The `ctx` Philosophy

!!! info "Context as Infrastructure"
    `ctx` is not a prompt: It is **infrastructure**.

    `ctx` creates versioned files that persist across time and sessions.

The attention budget is fixed. You can't expand it.

But you can **spend it wisely**:

1. Hierarchical importance
2. Progressive disclosure
3. Explicit budgets
4. Indexes over full content
5. Filesystem as structure

This is why `ctx` exists: **not** to cram more context into AI sessions,
**but** to curate the *right* context for each moment.

## The Mental Model

I now approach every AI interaction with one question:

> "*Given a fixed attention budget, what's the highest-signal thing I can load?*"

Not "*how do I explain everything*," but "*what's the minimum that matters*."

That shift (*from abundance to curation*) is the difference between
frustrating sessions and **productive** ones.

----

**Spend your tokens wisely**.

Your AI will thank you.

---

*See also: [Context as Infrastructure](2026-02-17-context-as-infrastructure.md)
that's the architectural companion to this post, explaining how to structure
the context that this post teaches you to budget.*

*See also: [Code Is Cheap. Judgment Is Not.](2026-02-17-code-is-cheap-judgment-is-not.md)
that explains why curation (the human skill this post describes) is the bottleneck
that AI cannot solve, and the thread that connects every post in this
blog.*
