docs/blog/index.md, before:

---
title: Blog
icon: lucide/newspaper
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

Stories, insights, and lessons learned from building and using ctx.

---

## Posts

### [ctx v0.2.0: The Archaeology Release](2026-02-01-ctx-v0.2.0-the-archaeology-release.md)

*Jose Alekhinne / February 1, 2026*

What if your AI could remember everything? Not just the current session, but
every session. v0.2.0 introduces the recall and journal systems—making 86
commits of history searchable, exportable, and analyzable. This post tells
the story of why those features exist.

**Topics**: session recall, journal system, structured entries, token budgets,
meta-tools

---

### [Refactoring with Intent: Human-Guided Sessions in AI Development](2026-02-01-refactoring-with-intent.md)

*Jose Alekhinne / February 1, 2026*

YOLO mode shipped 14 commands in a week. But technical debt doesn't send
invoices—it just waits. This is the story of what happened when we stopped
auto-accepting everything and started guiding the AI with intent: 27 commits
across 4 days, a major version release, and lessons that apply far beyond ctx.

**Topics**: refactoring, code quality, documentation standards, module
decomposition, YOLO vs intentional development

---

### [Building ctx Using ctx: A Meta-Experiment in AI-Assisted Development](2026-01-27-building-ctx-using-ctx.md)

*Jose Alekhinne / January 27, 2026*

What happens when you build a tool designed to give AI memory, using that very
same tool to remember what you're building? This is the story of ctx—how it
evolved from a hasty "YOLO mode" experiment to a disciplined system for
persistent AI context, and what we learned along the way.

**Topics**: dogfooding, AI-assisted development, Ralph Loop, session
persistence, architectural decisions

Commit message:

feat: convert commands to Agent Skills, enhance templates
Convert slash commands to Agent Skills following agentskills.io spec:
- Migrate .claude/commands/*.md to .claude/skills/*/SKILL.md
- Update internal/claude/cmd.go: Commands() -> Skills()
- Update internal/cli/initialize to create skills directories
- Each skill now has directory with SKILL.md containing frontmatter

Enhance ctx-add-decision skill with ADR learnings:
- Add "When NOT to Use" section
- Add Y-Statement quick format for lightweight decisions
- Prompt for alternatives considered
- Add cross-referencing guidance and quality checklist

Add "Update When" triggers to all context templates:
- CONSTITUTION.md, TASKS.md, CONVENTIONS.md, ARCHITECTURE.md
- LEARNINGS.md, GLOSSARY.md, DRIFT.md, DECISIONS.md
- Each file now has explicit guidance on when to update

Add Anti-Patterns section to AGENT_PLAYBOOK.md:
- Stale Context, Context Sprawl, Implicit Context
- Context Hoarding, Over-Specification, Context Avoidance
- Context Validation Checklist (quick and deep checks)

Add blog post: "The Attention Budget"
- Explains context engineering fundamentals
- Links to ctx primitives and philosophy
- Covers progressive disclosure, budgets, indexes

Update documentation to reference skills instead of commands.

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/blog/index.md, after:

---
title: Blog
icon: lucide/newspaper
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

Stories, insights, and lessons learned from building and using ctx.

---

## Posts

### [The Attention Budget: Why Your AI Forgets What You Just Told It](2026-02-03-the-attention-budget.md)

*Jose Alekhinne / February 3, 2026*

Every token you send to an AI consumes a finite resource—the attention budget.
Understanding this constraint shaped every design decision in ctx: hierarchical
file structure, explicit budgets, progressive disclosure, and filesystem-as-index.
This post explains the theory and how ctx operationalizes it.

**Topics**: attention mechanics, context engineering, progressive disclosure,
ctx primitives, token budgets

---

### [ctx v0.2.0: The Archaeology Release](2026-02-01-ctx-v0.2.0-the-archaeology-release.md)

*Jose Alekhinne / February 1, 2026*

What if your AI could remember everything? Not just the current session, but
every session. v0.2.0 introduces the recall and journal systems—making 86
commits of history searchable, exportable, and analyzable. This post tells
the story of why those features exist.

**Topics**: session recall, journal system, structured entries, token budgets,
meta-tools

---

### [Refactoring with Intent: Human-Guided Sessions in AI Development](2026-02-01-refactoring-with-intent.md)

*Jose Alekhinne / February 1, 2026*

YOLO mode shipped 14 commands in a week. But technical debt doesn't send
invoices—it just waits. This is the story of what happened when we stopped
auto-accepting everything and started guiding the AI with intent: 27 commits
across 4 days, a major version release, and lessons that apply far beyond ctx.

**Topics**: refactoring, code quality, documentation standards, module
decomposition, YOLO vs intentional development

---

### [Building ctx Using ctx: A Meta-Experiment in AI-Assisted Development](2026-01-27-building-ctx-using-ctx.md)

*Jose Alekhinne / January 27, 2026*

What happens when you build a tool designed to give AI memory, using that very
same tool to remember what you're building? This is the story of ctx—how it
evolved from a hasty "YOLO mode" experiment to a disciplined system for
persistent AI context, and what we learned along the way.

**Topics**: dogfooding, AI-assisted development, Ralph Loop, session
persistence, architectural decisions
