internal/assets/claude/skills/ctx-journal-normalize/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: ctx-journal-normalize
description: "Normalize journal source markdown for clean rendering. Use after `ctx journal site` shows rendering issues: fence nesting, metadata formatting, broken lists."
---

Reconstruct journal entries as clean markdown from stripped plain text.

## Before Normalizing

1. **Export first**: run `ctx recall export --all` (or `make journal`)
   so there are journal files to normalize
2. **Check if needed**: if the journal site renders cleanly, skip this

## When to Use

- After `ctx journal site` shows rendering issues
- When journal entries have fence nesting problems (no code highlighting)
- When metadata blocks render as raw `**Key**: value` instead of tables
- Before running `/ctx-journal-enrich` (clean markdown improves extraction)

## When NOT to Use

- On entries already normalized (check `.state.json`)
- When the site renders correctly (don't fix what isn't broken)
- On non-journal markdown files (this is journal-specific)

## Usage Examples

```text
/ctx-journal-normalize
/ctx-journal-normalize twinkly-stirring-kettle
/ctx-journal-normalize --compact
```

## Architecture

`ctx journal site` strips all code fence markers from site copies,
eliminating nesting conflicts. The result is readable plain text with
structural markers preserved. This skill goes further: it reconstructs
proper markdown in **source files** so the site renders with code
highlighting and proper formatting.

## Input Format

Source journal entries have these structural markers:
- Turn boundaries: `### N. Role (HH:MM:SS)`
- Tool calls: `Tool Name: args` on their own line
- Tool output: block following a Tool Output turn header
- Section breaks: `---`
- Frontmatter: YAML between `---` delimiters at file start

## Output Rules

1. **Fences**: Always use **backtick** fences, never tildes.
   Innermost code gets 3 backticks. Each nesting level adds 1.
   Never nest same-count fences.
2. **Metadata**: `**Key**: value` blocks become collapsed `<details>`
   with `<table>`. Summary from Date/Duration/Turns/Model.
3. **Tool output**: Collapse into
   `<details><summary>N lines</summary>` when > 10 lines.
4. **Lists**: 2-space indent per level. Continuation lines match
   list item indent.
5. **No invented content**: Every word in output must trace to input.
   Structure changes only.

## Modes

**Default (lossless)**: Reformat only. All content preserved.

**Compact** (when user requests `--compact` or "compact"): May
summarize tool outputs > 50 lines; keep first/last 5 lines with
`... (N lines omitted)`. Flag this to user before proceeding.

## Process

1. **Backup first**: `cp -r .context/journal/ .context/journal.bak/`
   - Always back up before modifying; files may contain user edits
   - Tell the user where the backup is
2. Identify files to normalize:
   - If user specifies a file/pattern, use that
   - Otherwise, scan `.context/journal/*.md`
   - **Skip already-normalized files** by checking the state file:
     ```bash
     ctx system mark-journal --check <filename> normalized
     ```
     Or read `.context/journal/.state.json` directly and skip entries
     with a `normalized` date set.
3. Process files turn-by-turn (not whole file at once;
   large files blow context):
   - Fix fence nesting, metadata, lists per output rules
4. Write back the fixed files
5. **Mark normalized** in the state file:
   ```bash
   ctx system mark-journal <filename> normalized
   ```
   After verifying fence nesting is correct, also mark fences:
   ```bash
   ctx system mark-journal <filename> fences_verified
   ```
6. Regenerate site: `ctx journal site --build`
7. Report what changed and remind user of backup location

## Idempotency

Processing state is tracked in `.context/journal/.state.json` (not
in-band HTML comment markers). Two stages:

- **normalized**: metadata tables done. Skip metadata conversion
  on re-run.
- **fences_verified**: fence reconstruction done.
  `stripFences` in `ctx journal site` only skips files with this
  stage set.

Files without `fences_verified` get all fences stripped in site copies
(readable but no code highlighting). Mark this stage after verifying
fence nesting is correct.

## Scope

- Operate on **source files** (`.context/journal/`)
- Changes persist; no repeated normalization needed
- Preserve all substantive content; only fix formatting

Commit message:

feat: add `ctx system bootstrap` command and context-dir nudge footers
Replace all hardcoded `.context` paths in the system package with
`rc.ContextDir()` so external context directories work correctly.
Add `ctx system bootstrap` command that prints the resolved context
directory, file list, and operating rules for AI agents. Piggyback
a `Context: <dir>` footer on every nudge (VERBATIM relay hooks and
JSON HookResponse hooks) so the agent stays anchored to the correct
directory throughout long sessions.

Update CLAUDE.md template, AGENT_PLAYBOOK.md, all 21 skill files,
and documentation to reference bootstrap instead of hardcoded paths.

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

internal/assets/claude/skills/ctx-journal-normalize/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: ctx-journal-normalize
description: "Normalize journal source markdown for clean rendering. Use after `ctx journal site` shows rendering issues: fence nesting, metadata formatting, broken lists."
---

Reconstruct journal entries as clean markdown from stripped plain text.

## Before Normalizing

1. **Export first**: run `ctx recall export --all` (or `make journal`)
   so there are journal files to normalize
2. **Check if needed**: if the journal site renders cleanly, skip this

## When to Use

- After `ctx journal site` shows rendering issues
- When journal entries have fence nesting problems (no code highlighting)
- When metadata blocks render as raw `**Key**: value` instead of tables
- Before running `/ctx-journal-enrich` (clean markdown improves extraction)

## When NOT to Use

- On entries already normalized (check `.state.json`)
- When the site renders correctly (don't fix what isn't broken)
- On non-journal markdown files (this is journal-specific)

## Usage Examples

```text
/ctx-journal-normalize
/ctx-journal-normalize twinkly-stirring-kettle
/ctx-journal-normalize --compact
```

## Architecture

`ctx journal site` strips all code fence markers from site copies,
eliminating nesting conflicts. The result is readable plain text with
structural markers preserved. This skill goes further: it reconstructs
proper markdown in **source files** so the site renders with code
highlighting and proper formatting.

## Input Format

Source journal entries have these structural markers:
- Turn boundaries: `### N. Role (HH:MM:SS)`
- Tool calls: `Tool Name: args` on their own line
- Tool output: block following a Tool Output turn header
- Section breaks: `---`
- Frontmatter: YAML between `---` delimiters at file start

## Output Rules

1. **Fences**: Always use **backtick** fences, never tildes.
   Innermost code gets 3 backticks. Each nesting level adds 1.
   Never nest same-count fences.
2. **Metadata**: `**Key**: value` blocks become collapsed `<details>`
   with `<table>`. Summary from Date/Duration/Turns/Model.
3. **Tool output**: Collapse into
   `<details><summary>N lines</summary>` when > 10 lines.
4. **Lists**: 2-space indent per level. Continuation lines match
   list item indent.
5. **No invented content**: Every word in output must trace to input.
   Structure changes only.

## Modes

**Default (lossless)**: Reformat only. All content preserved.

**Compact** (when user requests `--compact` or "compact"): May
summarize tool outputs > 50 lines; keep first/last 5 lines with
`... (N lines omitted)`. Flag this to user before proceeding.

## Process

1. **Backup first**: back up the journal directory before modifying
   (e.g., copy it to a `.bak` sibling); files may contain user edits.
   Tell the user where the backup is.
2. Identify files to normalize:
   - If user specifies a file/pattern, use that
   - Otherwise, scan the journal directory for `*.md` files
   - **Skip already-normalized files** by checking the state file:
     ```bash
     ctx system mark-journal --check <filename> normalized
     ```
     Or read `.state.json` in the journal directory directly and skip
     entries with a `normalized` date set.
3. Process files turn-by-turn (not whole file at once;
   large files blow context):
   - Fix fence nesting, metadata, lists per output rules
4. Write back the fixed files
5. **Mark normalized** in the state file:
   ```bash
   ctx system mark-journal <filename> normalized
   ```
   After verifying fence nesting is correct, also mark fences:
   ```bash
   ctx system mark-journal <filename> fences_verified
   ```
6. Regenerate site: `ctx journal site --build`
7. Report what changed and remind user of backup location

## Idempotency

Processing state is tracked in `.state.json` within the journal
directory (not in-band HTML comment markers). Two stages:

- **normalized**: metadata tables done. Skip metadata conversion
  on re-run.
- **fences_verified**: fence reconstruction done.
  `stripFences` in `ctx journal site` only skips files with this
  stage set.

Files without `fences_verified` get all fences stripped in site copies
(readable but no code highlighting). Mark this stage after verifying
fence nesting is correct.

## Scope

- Operate on **source files** in the journal directory
- Changes persist; no repeated normalization needed
- Preserve all substantive content; only fix formatting
