docs/recipes/guide-your-agent.md, before:

---
title: Guide Your Agent
icon: lucide/sparkles
---

!!! tip "Commands vs. Skills"
    **Commands** (`ctx status`, `ctx add task`) run in your
    terminal.

    **Skills** (`/ctx-reflect`, `/ctx-next`) run inside
    your AI coding assistant.

    Recipes combine both.

    Think of commands as **structure** and skills as **behavior**.

## Proactive Behavior

These recipes show explicit commands and skills, but agents
trained on the `ctx` playbook are **proactive**: they offer to
save learnings after debugging, record decisions after
trade-offs, create follow-up tasks after completing work, and
suggest what to work on next.

**Your questions train the agent.** Asking "*what have we
learned?*" or "*is our context clean?*" does two things:

* It triggers the workflow right now,
* **and** it **reinforces** the pattern.

The more you guide, the more the agent **habituates** the behavior and begins
offering on its own.

Each recipe includes a **Conversational Approach** section
showing these natural-language patterns.

!!! tip Help Your Agent Help You
    Don't wait passively for proactive behavior: especially in
    early sessions.

    **Ask, guide, reinforce.** Over time, you ask less and
    the agent offers more.

## Next Up

**[Session Ceremonies →](session-ceremonies.md)**: The two bookend
rituals for every session — `/ctx-remember` at the start,
`/ctx-wrap-up` at the end.

## See Also

* [The Complete Session](session-lifecycle.md): full session
  lifecycle from start to finish
* [Prompting Guide](../home/prompting-guide.md): general tips for
  working effectively with AI coding assistants

Commit message:

feat: add `ctx recall sync` for frontmatter-to-state lock sync
Adds a sister command to `ctx recall lock` that scans journal markdowns
and syncs their frontmatter lock state into .state.json. This supports
the enrichment workflow where users add `locked: true` to frontmatter
manually, then sweep all files to propagate state.

Also includes pre-existing doc updates, site regeneration, new
system-hooks-audit recipe, and recipes-nav-subgroups spec.

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/recipes/guide-your-agent.md, after:

---
title: Guide Your Agent
icon: lucide/sparkles
---

!!! tip "Commands vs. Skills"
    **Commands** (`ctx status`, `ctx add task`) run in your
    terminal.

    **Skills** (`/ctx-reflect`, `/ctx-next`) run inside
    your AI coding assistant.

    Recipes combine both.

    Think of commands as **structure** and skills as **behavior**.

## Proactive Behavior

These recipes show explicit commands and skills, but agents
trained on the `ctx` playbook are **proactive**: they offer to
save learnings after debugging, record decisions after
trade-offs, create follow-up tasks after completing work, and
suggest what to work on next.

**Your questions train the agent.** Asking "*what have we
learned?*" or "*is our context clean?*" does two things:

* It triggers the workflow right now,
* **and** it **reinforces** the pattern.

The more you guide, the more the agent **habituates** the behavior and begins
offering on its own.

Each recipe includes a **Conversational Approach** section
showing these natural-language patterns.

!!! tip Help Your Agent Help You
    Don't wait passively for proactive behavior: especially in
    early sessions.

    **Ask, guide, reinforce.** Over time, you ask less and
    the agent offers more.

## Next Up

**[Setup Across AI Tools →](multi-tool-setup.md)**: Initialize ctx
and configure hooks for Claude Code, Cursor, Aider, Copilot, or
Windsurf.

## See Also

* [The Complete Session](session-lifecycle.md): full session
  lifecycle from start to finish
* [Prompting Guide](../home/prompting-guide.md): general tips for
  working effectively with AI coding assistants
