docs/recipes/index.md, before:

---
title: Recipes
icon: lucide/chef-hat
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

Workflow recipes showing how `ctx` commands and skills work together.

Each recipe solves a specific problem by combining multiple tools
into a step-by-step workflow.

!!! tip "Commands vs. Skills"
    **Commands** (`ctx status`, `ctx add task`) run in your
    terminal.

    **Skills** (`/ctx-reflect`, `/ctx-next`) run inside
    your AI coding assistant.

    Recipes combine both.

    Think of commands as **structure** and skills as **behavior**.

## Guide Your Agent

These recipes show explicit commands and skills, but agents
trained on the `ctx` playbook are **proactive**: they offer to
save learnings after debugging, record decisions after
trade-offs, create follow-up tasks after completing work, and
suggest what to work on next.

**Your questions train the agent.** Asking "*what have we
learned?*" or "*is our context clean?*" does two things: 

* It triggers the workflow right now, 
* **and** it **reinforces** the pattern. 

The more you guide, the more the agent **habituates** the behavior and begins 
offering on its own.

Each recipe includes a **Conversational Approach** section
showing these natural-language patterns.

!!! tip Help Your Agent Help You
    Don't wait passively for proactive behavior: especially in
    early sessions. 

    **Ask, guide, reinforce.** Over time, you ask less and 
    the agent offers more.

---

## Getting Started

### [Setting Up ctx Across AI Tools](multi-tool-setup.md)

Initialize `ctx` and configure hooks for Claude Code, Cursor,
Aider, Copilot, or Windsurf. Includes shell completion,
watch mode for non-native tools, and verification.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `ctx hook`, `ctx agent`, `ctx completion`,
`ctx watch`

---

### [Keeping Context in a Separate Repo](external-context.md)

Store context files outside the project tree: in a private repo,
shared directory, or anywhere else. Useful for open-source projects
with private context or multi-repo setups.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `--context-dir`, `--allow-outside-cwd`,
`.contextrc`, `/ctx-status`

---

## Daily Workflow

These recipes cover the workflows you’ll use every day when
working with ctx.

### [The Complete Session](session-lifecycle.md)

Walk through a full `ctx` session from start to finish: loading
context, picking what to work on, committing with context
capture, reflecting, and saving a snapshot.

**Uses**: `ctx status`, `ctx agent`,
`/ctx-remember`, `/ctx-next`, `/ctx-commit`, `/ctx-reflect`

---

### [Tracking Work Across Sessions](task-management.md)

Add, prioritize, complete, snapshot, and archive tasks. Keep
`TASKS.md` focused as your project evolves across dozens of
sessions.

**Uses**: `ctx add task`, `ctx complete`, `ctx tasks archive`,
`ctx tasks snapshot`, `/ctx-add-task`, `/ctx-archive`, `/ctx-next`

---

### [Persisting Decisions, Learnings, and Conventions](knowledge-capture.md)

Record architectural decisions with rationale, capture gotchas
and lessons learned, and codify coding conventions so they
survive across sessions and team members.

**Uses**: `ctx add decision`, `ctx add learning`,
`ctx add convention`, `ctx decisions reindex`,
`ctx learnings reindex`, `/ctx-add-decision`,
`/ctx-add-learning`, `/ctx-add-convention`, `/ctx-reflect`

---

### [Syncing Scratchpad Notes Across Machines](scratchpad-sync.md)

Distribute your scratchpad encryption key, push and pull encrypted
notes via git, and resolve merge conflicts when two machines edit
simultaneously.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `ctx pad`, `ctx pad resolve`, `scp`

---

### [Using the Scratchpad with Claude](scratchpad-with-claude.md)

Use the encrypted scratchpad for quick notes, working memory, and
sensitive values during AI sessions. Natural language in, encrypted
storage out.

**Uses**: `ctx pad`, `/ctx-pad`, `ctx pad show`, `ctx pad edit`

---

## Maintenance

### [Hook Output Patterns](hook-output-patterns.md)

Choose the right output pattern for your Claude Code hooks: `VERBATIM`
relay for user-facing reminders, hard gates for invariants, agent
directives for nudges, and five more patterns across the spectrum.

**Uses**: `.claude/hooks/`, `settings.local.json`

---

### [Claude Code Permission Hygiene](claude-code-permissions.md)

Keep `.claude/settings.local.json` clean: recommended safe defaults,
what to never pre-approve, and a maintenance workflow for cleaning
up session debris.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `/ctx-drift`, `/sanitize-permissions`,
`ctx permissions snapshot`, `ctx permissions restore`

---

### [Permission Snapshots](permission-snapshots.md)

Capture a known-good permission baseline as a golden image, then restore
at session start to automatically drop session-accumulated permissions.

**Uses**: `ctx permissions snapshot`, `ctx permissions restore`,
`/sanitize-permissions`

---

### [Detecting and Fixing Drift](context-health.md)

Keep context files accurate by detecting structural drift
(stale paths, missing files, stale file ages) and task
staleness. Includes alignment audits to verify documentation
claims match agent instructions.

**Uses**: `ctx drift`, `ctx sync`, `ctx compact`, `ctx status`,
`/ctx-drift`, `/ctx-alignment-audit`, `/ctx-status`,
`/ctx-prompt-audit`

---

## History and Discovery

### [Browsing and Enriching Past Sessions](session-archaeology.md)

Export your AI session history to a browsable journal site.
Normalize rendering, enrich entries with metadata, and search
across months of work.

**Uses**: `ctx recall list/show/export`, `ctx journal site`,
`ctx journal obsidian`, `ctx serve`, `/ctx-recall`,
`/ctx-journal-normalize`, `/ctx-journal-enrich`,
`/ctx-journal-enrich-all`

---

## Advanced

### [Running an Unattended AI Agent](autonomous-loops.md)

Set up a loop where an AI agent works through tasks overnight
without you at the keyboard, using ctx for persistent memory
between iterations.

This recipe shows how ctx supports long-running agent loops
without losing context or intent.

**Uses**: `ctx init --ralph`, `ctx loop`, `ctx watch`, `ctx load`,
`/ctx-loop`, `/ctx-implement`, `/ctx-context-monitor`

---

### [When to Use a Team of Agents](when-to-use-agent-teams.md)

Decision framework for choosing between a single agent, parallel
worktrees, and a full agent team. Covers the file overlap test,
when teams make things worse, and what ctx provides at each level.

**Uses**: `/ctx-worktree`, `/ctx-next`, `ctx status`

---

### [Parallel Agent Development with Git Worktrees](parallel-worktrees.md)

Split a large backlog across 3-4 agents using git worktrees,
each on its own branch and working directory. Group tasks by
file overlap, work in parallel, merge back.

**Uses**: `/ctx-worktree`, `/ctx-next`, `git worktree`,
`git merge`

---

### [Turning Activity into Content](publishing.md)

Generate blog posts from project activity, write changelog
posts from commit ranges, and publish a browsable journal
site from your session history.

**Uses**: `ctx journal site`, `ctx journal obsidian`, `ctx serve`,
`ctx recall export`, `/ctx-blog`, `/ctx-blog-changelog`,
`/ctx-journal-enrich`, `/ctx-journal-normalize`

Commit message:

Add allow_outside_cwd to .contextrc, /check-links skill, docs & site updates
- Add allow_outside_cwd field to .contextrc so external context dirs
  no longer need --allow-outside-cwd on every command
- Create /check-links skill for dead link auditing (internal + external)
- Wire /check-links as check #12 in /consolidate
- Fix Generated Hooks and Generated Configuration in docs/integrations.md
  (was missing check-journal.sh, post-commit.sh, and most hook config)
- Update docs/cli-reference.md, external-context recipe, skills.md,
  prompting-guide.md with new skill and .contextrc field
- Record decision and learning

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/recipes/index.md, after:

---
title: Recipes
icon: lucide/chef-hat
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

Workflow recipes showing how `ctx` commands and skills work together.

Each recipe solves a specific problem by combining multiple tools
into a step-by-step workflow.

!!! tip "Commands vs. Skills"
    **Commands** (`ctx status`, `ctx add task`) run in your
    terminal.

    **Skills** (`/ctx-reflect`, `/ctx-next`) run inside
    your AI coding assistant.

    Recipes combine both.

    Think of commands as **structure** and skills as **behavior**.

## Guide Your Agent

These recipes show explicit commands and skills, but agents
trained on the `ctx` playbook are **proactive**: they offer to
save learnings after debugging, record decisions after
trade-offs, create follow-up tasks after completing work, and
suggest what to work on next.

**Your questions train the agent.** Asking "*what have we
learned?*" or "*is our context clean?*" does two things: 

* It triggers the workflow right now, 
* **and** it **reinforces** the pattern. 

The more you guide, the more the agent **habituates** the behavior and begins 
offering on its own.

Each recipe includes a **Conversational Approach** section
showing these natural-language patterns.

!!! tip Help Your Agent Help You
    Don't wait passively for proactive behavior: especially in
    early sessions. 

    **Ask, guide, reinforce.** Over time, you ask less and 
    the agent offers more.

---

## Getting Started

### [Setting Up ctx Across AI Tools](multi-tool-setup.md)

Initialize `ctx` and configure hooks for Claude Code, Cursor,
Aider, Copilot, or Windsurf. Includes shell completion,
watch mode for non-native tools, and verification.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `ctx hook`, `ctx agent`, `ctx completion`,
`ctx watch`

---

### [Keeping Context in a Separate Repo](external-context.md)

Store context files outside the project tree: in a private repo,
shared directory, or anywhere else. Useful for open source projects
with private context or multi-repo setups.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `--context-dir`, `--allow-outside-cwd`,
`.contextrc`, `/ctx-status`

---

## Daily Workflow

These recipes cover the workflows you will use every day when
working with ctx.

### [The Complete Session](session-lifecycle.md)

Walk through a full `ctx` session from start to finish: loading
context, picking what to work on, committing with context
capture, reflecting, and saving a snapshot.

**Uses**: `ctx status`, `ctx agent`,
`/ctx-remember`, `/ctx-next`, `/ctx-commit`, `/ctx-reflect`

---

### [Tracking Work Across Sessions](task-management.md)

Add, prioritize, complete, snapshot, and archive tasks. Keep
`TASKS.md` focused as your project evolves across dozens of
sessions.

**Uses**: `ctx add task`, `ctx complete`, `ctx tasks archive`,
`ctx tasks snapshot`, `/ctx-add-task`, `/ctx-archive`, `/ctx-next`

---

### [Persisting Decisions, Learnings, and Conventions](knowledge-capture.md)

Record architectural decisions with rationale, capture gotchas
and lessons learned, and codify coding conventions so they
survive across sessions and team members.

**Uses**: `ctx add decision`, `ctx add learning`,
`ctx add convention`, `ctx decisions reindex`,
`ctx learnings reindex`, `/ctx-add-decision`,
`/ctx-add-learning`, `/ctx-add-convention`, `/ctx-reflect`

---

### [Syncing Scratchpad Notes Across Machines](scratchpad-sync.md)

Distribute your **scratchpad** encryption key, push and pull encrypted
notes via git, and resolve merge conflicts when two machines edit
simultaneously.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `ctx pad`, `ctx pad resolve`, `scp`

---

### [Using the Scratchpad with Claude](scratchpad-with-claude.md)

Use the encrypted **scratchpad** for quick notes, working memory, and
sensitive values during AI sessions. Natural language in, encrypted
storage out.

**Uses**: `ctx pad`, `/ctx-pad`, `ctx pad show`, `ctx pad edit`

---

## Maintenance

### [Hook Output Patterns](hook-output-patterns.md)

Choose the right output pattern for your Claude Code hooks: `VERBATIM`
relay for user-facing reminders, **hard gates** for invariants, agent
directives for nudges, and five more patterns across the spectrum.

**Uses**: `.claude/hooks/`, `settings.local.json`

---

### [Claude Code Permission Hygiene](claude-code-permissions.md)

Keep `.claude/settings.local.json` clean: recommended safe defaults,
what to never pre-approve, and a maintenance workflow for cleaning
up session debris.

**Uses**: `ctx init`, `/ctx-drift`, `/sanitize-permissions`,
`ctx permissions snapshot`, `ctx permissions restore`

---

### [Permission Snapshots](permission-snapshots.md)

Capture a known-good permission baseline as a golden image, then restore
at session start to automatically drop session-accumulated permissions.

**Uses**: `ctx permissions snapshot`, `ctx permissions restore`,
`/sanitize-permissions`

---

### [Detecting and Fixing Drift](context-health.md)

Keep context files accurate by detecting structural drift
(*stale paths, missing files, stale file ages*) and task
staleness. Includes alignment audits to verify documentation
claims match agent instructions.

**Uses**: `ctx drift`, `ctx sync`, `ctx compact`, `ctx status`,
`/ctx-drift`, `/ctx-alignment-audit`, `/ctx-status`,
`/ctx-prompt-audit`

---

## History and Discovery

### [Browsing and Enriching Past Sessions](session-archaeology.md)

Export your AI session history to a browsable journal site.
Normalize rendering, enrich entries with metadata, and search
across months of work.

**Uses**: `ctx recall list/show/export`, `ctx journal site`,
`ctx journal obsidian`, `ctx serve`, `/ctx-recall`,
`/ctx-journal-normalize`, `/ctx-journal-enrich`,
`/ctx-journal-enrich-all`

---

## Advanced

### [Running an Unattended AI Agent](autonomous-loops.md)

Set up a loop where an AI agent works through tasks overnight
without you at the keyboard, using ctx for persistent memory
between iterations.

This recipe shows how `ctx` supports long-running agent loops
without losing context or intent.

**Uses**: `ctx init --ralph`, `ctx loop`, `ctx watch`, `ctx load`,
`/ctx-loop`, `/ctx-implement`, `/ctx-context-monitor`

---

### [When to Use a Team of Agents](when-to-use-agent-teams.md)

Decision framework for choosing between a single agent, parallel
worktrees, and a full agent team. 

This recipe covers the file overlap test, when teams make things worse, and 
what ctx provides at each level.

**Uses**: `/ctx-worktree`, `/ctx-next`, `ctx status`

---

### [Parallel Agent Development with Git Worktrees](parallel-worktrees.md)

Split a large backlog across 3-4 agents using **git worktrees**,
each on its own branch and working directory. Group tasks by
file overlap, work in parallel, merge back.

**Uses**: `/ctx-worktree`, `/ctx-next`, `git worktree`,
`git merge`

---

### [Turning Activity into Content](publishing.md)

Generate blog posts from project activity, write changelog
posts from commit ranges, and publish a browsable journal
site from your session history. 

The output is generic Markdown, but the skills are tuned for the `ctx`-style 
blog artifacts you see on this website.

**Uses**: `ctx journal site`, `ctx journal obsidian`, `ctx serve`,
`ctx recall export`, `/ctx-blog`, `/ctx-blog-changelog`,
`/ctx-journal-enrich`, `/ctx-journal-normalize`
