docs/recipes/parallel-worktrees.md, before:

---
title: Parallel Agent Development with Git Worktrees
icon: lucide/git-branch
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

## Problem

You have a large backlog (*10, 20, 30 open tasks*) and many of them are
independent: docs work that doesn't touch Go code, a new package that
doesn't overlap with existing ones, test coverage for a stable module.

Running one agent at a time means serial execution. You want 3-4 agents
working in parallel, each on its own track, without stepping on each
other's files.

**Git worktrees** solve this. 

Each worktree is a separate working directory with its own branch, but they 
share the same `.git` object database. Combined with ctx's persistent context, 
each agent session picks up the full project state and works independently.

## TL;DR

```text
/ctx-worktree                                   # 1. group tasks by file overlap
git worktree add ../myproject-docs -b work/docs # 2. create worktrees
cd ../myproject-docs && claude                  # 3. launch agents (one per track)
/ctx-worktree teardown docs                     # 4. merge back and clean up
```

`TASKS.md` will conflict on merge: Accept all `[x]` completions from both sides.

## Commands and Skills Used

| Tool             | Type    | Purpose                                     |
|------------------|---------|---------------------------------------------|
| `/ctx-worktree`  | Skill   | Create, list, and tear down worktrees       |
| `/ctx-next`      | Skill   | Pick tasks from the backlog for each track  |
| `git worktree`   | Command | Underlying git worktree management          |
| `git merge`      | Command | Merge completed tracks back to main         |

## The Workflow

### Step 1: Assess the Backlog

Start in your main checkout. Ask the agent to analyze your tasks and
group them by blast radius — which files and directories each task
touches.

```text
/ctx-worktree
Look at TASKS.md and group the pending tasks into 2-3 independent
tracks based on which files they'd touch. Show me the grouping
before creating anything.
```

The agent reads TASKS.md, estimates file overlap, and proposes groups:

```text
Proposed worktree groups:

  work/docs    — recipe updates, blog post (touches: docs/)
  work/crypto  — scratchpad encryption infra (touches: internal/crypto/)
  work/tests   — recall test coverage (touches: internal/cli/recall/)
```

### Step 2: Create the Worktrees

Once you approve the grouping, the agent creates worktrees as sibling
directories:

```text
Create the worktrees for those three groups.
```

Behind the scenes:

```bash
git worktree add ../myproject-docs -b work/docs
git worktree add ../myproject-crypto -b work/crypto
git worktree add ../myproject-tests -b work/tests
```

Each worktree is a full working copy on its own branch.

### Step 3: Launch Agents

Open a separate terminal (or editor window) for each worktree and
start a Claude Code session:

```bash
# Terminal 1
cd ../myproject-docs
claude

# Terminal 2
cd ../myproject-crypto
claude

# Terminal 3
cd ../myproject-tests
claude
```

Each agent sees the full project, including `.context/`, and can work
independently. Do **not** run `ctx init` in worktrees: The context
directory is already tracked in `git`.

### Step 4: Work

Each agent works through its assigned tasks. They can read TASKS.md to
know what's assigned to their track, use `/ctx-next` to pick the next
item, and commit normally on their `work/*` branch.

### Step 5: Merge Back

As each track finishes, return to the main checkout and merge:

```text
/ctx-worktree teardown docs
```

The agent checks for uncommitted changes, merges `work/docs` into your
current branch, removes the worktree, and deletes the branch.

### Step 6: Handle TASKS.md Conflicts

TASKS.md will almost always conflict when merging — multiple agents
marked different tasks as `[x]`. This is expected and easy to resolve:

**Accept all completions from both sides.** No task should go from
`[x]` back to `[ ]`. The merge resolution is always additive.

```text
The merge has a conflict in TASKS.md. Both branches completed
different tasks. Accept all [x] completions from both sides.
```

### Step 7: Cleanup

After all tracks are merged, verify everything is clean:

```text
/ctx-worktree list
```

Should show only the main working tree. All `work/*` branches should
be gone.

## Conversational Approach

You don't have to use the skill directly for every step. These natural
prompts work:

- *"I have a big backlog. Can we split it across worktrees?"*
- *"Which of these tasks can run in parallel without conflicts?"*
- *"Merge the docs track back in."*
- *"Clean up all the worktrees, we're done."*

## What Does NOT Work in Worktrees

The encryption key (`.context/.scratchpad.key`) is gitignored — it only
exists in the main checkout. This affects key-dependent features:

- **`ctx pad`** — the scratchpad is inaccessible. Commands fail
  gracefully (no key found). Use the pad from the main checkout only.
- **`ctx notify`** — webhook notifications silently do nothing. Agents
  in worktrees cannot send alerts for loop completions, nudges, or
  custom events. If you need visibility into worktree agents, monitor
  them from the terminal rather than relying on webhooks.
- **Journal enrichment** — `ctx recall export` and `ctx journal enrich`
  write files relative to the current working directory. Enrichments
  created in a worktree stay there and are discarded on teardown.
  Enrich journals on the main branch after merging — the JSONL session
  logs are always intact.

Tracked context files (TASKS.md, DECISIONS.md, LEARNINGS.md,
CONVENTIONS.md) work normally — git handles them.

## Tips

- **3-4 worktrees max.** Beyond that, merge complexity outweighs the
  parallelism benefit. The skill enforces this limit.
- **Group by package or directory**, not by priority. Two high-priority
  tasks that touch the same files must be in the same track.
- **TASKS.md will conflict** on merge. This is normal. Accept all `[x]`
  completions — the resolution is always additive.
- **Don't run `ctx init` in worktrees.** The `.context/` directory is
  tracked in git. Running init overwrites shared context files.
- **Name worktrees by concern**, not by number. `work/docs` and
  `work/crypto` are more useful than `work/track-1` and `work/track-2`.
- **Commit frequently** in each worktree. Smaller commits make merge
  conflicts easier to resolve.

## Next Up

Back to the beginning: **[Guide Your Agent →](guide-your-agent.md)**

Or explore the [full recipe list](index.md).

## See Also

- [Running an Unattended AI Agent](autonomous-loops.md) — for serial
  autonomous loops instead of parallel tracks
- [Tracking Work Across Sessions](task-management.md) — managing the
  task backlog that feeds into parallelization
- [The Complete Session](session-lifecycle.md) — the session workflow
  each agent follows inside its worktree

Commit message:

feat: header rebrand, remind/map features, shell-to-go hooks, docs overhaul
Header rebrand:
- Rename ASCII art header from "Context:" to "ctx:" across all
  source files, LICENSE, and README (~300 files, mechanical)

New features:
- Add `ctx remind` command and ctx-remind skill for session reminders
- Add ctx-map skill for architecture mapping with staleness tracking
- Add drift detector check for undocumented internal/ packages
- Add config migration support (internal/config/migrate.go)

Shell hooks → Go migration:
- Delete .claude/hooks/block-dangerous-commands.sh and check-backup-age.sh
- Add Go equivalents: block_dangerous_commands.go, check_backup_age.go,
  check_map_staleness.go, check_reminders.go (with tests)
- Register new subcommands in system.go
- Add shell-hooks-to-go migration spec

Documentation:
- Overhaul configuration, recipes, and reference docs
- Add session-reminders recipe
- Update CLI reference with new commands
- Refresh all site/ HTML output
- Update prompting guide, session lifecycle, knowledge capture,
  multi-tool setup, scratchpad, ceremonies, and more

Context files:
- Update ARCHITECTURE.md, DECISIONS.md, LEARNINGS.md, TASKS.md
- Add DETAILED_DESIGN.md and map-tracking.json

Misc:
- Update hooks.json with new hook registrations
- Enhance ctx-drift, ctx-journal-enrich, ctx-pad, ctx-worktree skills
- Update notify setup, pad store, journal parse/types
- Add detect-ai-typography.sh hack script
- Add specs: ctx-map.md, remind.md, rss-feed.md
- Update .gitignore, .ctxrc, zensical.toml

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/recipes/parallel-worktrees.md, after:

---
title: Parallel Agent Development with Git Worktrees
icon: lucide/git-branch
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

## The Problem

You have a large backlog (*10, 20, 30 open tasks*) and many of them are
independent: docs work that doesn't touch Go code, a new package that
doesn't overlap with existing ones, test coverage for a stable module.

Running one agent at a time means serial execution. You want 3-4 agents
working in parallel, each on its own track, without stepping on each
other's files.

**Git worktrees** solve this. 

Each worktree is a separate working directory with its own branch, but they 
share the same `.git` object database. Combined with ctx's persistent context, 
each agent session picks up the full project state and works independently.

## TL;DR

```text
/ctx-worktree                                   # 1. group tasks by file overlap
git worktree add ../myproject-docs -b work/docs # 2. create worktrees
cd ../myproject-docs && claude                  # 3. launch agents (one per track)
/ctx-worktree teardown docs                     # 4. merge back and clean up
```

`TASKS.md` will conflict on merge: Accept all `[x]` completions from both sides.

## Commands and Skills Used

| Tool             | Type    | Purpose                                     |
|------------------|---------|---------------------------------------------|
| `/ctx-worktree`  | Skill   | Create, list, and tear down worktrees       |
| `/ctx-next`      | Skill   | Pick tasks from the backlog for each track  |
| `git worktree`   | Command | Underlying git worktree management          |
| `git merge`      | Command | Merge completed tracks back to main         |

## The Workflow

### Step 1: Assess the Backlog

Start in your main checkout. Ask the agent to analyze your tasks and
group them by blast radius — which files and directories each task
touches.

```text
/ctx-worktree
Look at TASKS.md and group the pending tasks into 2-3 independent
tracks based on which files they'd touch. Show me the grouping
before creating anything.
```

The agent reads TASKS.md, estimates file overlap, and proposes groups:

```text
Proposed worktree groups:

  work/docs    — recipe updates, blog post (touches: docs/)
  work/crypto  — scratchpad encryption infra (touches: internal/crypto/)
  work/tests   — recall test coverage (touches: internal/cli/recall/)
```

### Step 2: Create the Worktrees

Once you approve the grouping, the agent creates worktrees as sibling
directories:

```text
Create the worktrees for those three groups.
```

Behind the scenes:

```bash
git worktree add ../myproject-docs -b work/docs
git worktree add ../myproject-crypto -b work/crypto
git worktree add ../myproject-tests -b work/tests
```

Each worktree is a full working copy on its own branch.

### Step 3: Launch Agents

Open a separate terminal (or editor window) for each worktree and
start a Claude Code session:

```bash
# Terminal 1
cd ../myproject-docs
claude

# Terminal 2
cd ../myproject-crypto
claude

# Terminal 3
cd ../myproject-tests
claude
```

Each agent sees the full project, including `.context/`, and can work
independently. Do **not** run `ctx init` in worktrees: The context
directory is already tracked in `git`.

### Step 4: Work

Each agent works through its assigned tasks. They can read TASKS.md to
know what's assigned to their track, use `/ctx-next` to pick the next
item, and commit normally on their `work/*` branch.

### Step 5: Merge Back

As each track finishes, return to the main checkout and merge:

```text
/ctx-worktree teardown docs
```

The agent checks for uncommitted changes, merges `work/docs` into your
current branch, removes the worktree, and deletes the branch.

### Step 6: Handle TASKS.md Conflicts

TASKS.md will almost always conflict when merging — multiple agents
marked different tasks as `[x]`. This is expected and easy to resolve:

**Accept all completions from both sides.** No task should go from
`[x]` back to `[ ]`. The merge resolution is always additive.

```text
The merge has a conflict in TASKS.md. Both branches completed
different tasks. Accept all [x] completions from both sides.
```

### Step 7: Cleanup

After all tracks are merged, verify everything is clean:

```text
/ctx-worktree list
```

Should show only the main working tree. All `work/*` branches should
be gone.

## Conversational Approach

You don't have to use the skill directly for every step. These natural
prompts work:

- *"I have a big backlog. Can we split it across worktrees?"*
- *"Which of these tasks can run in parallel without conflicts?"*
- *"Merge the docs track back in."*
- *"Clean up all the worktrees, we're done."*

## What Does NOT Work in Worktrees

The encryption key (`.context/.context.key`) is gitignored: It only
exists in the main checkout. This affects key-dependent features:

* **`ctx pad`**: The scratchpad is inaccessible. Commands fail
  gracefully (*no key found*). Use the pad from the main checkout only.
* **`ctx notify`**: Webhook notifications silently do nothing. Agents
  in worktrees cannot send alerts for loop completions, nudges, or
  custom events. If you need visibility into worktree agents, monitor
  them from the terminal rather than relying on webhooks.
* **Journal enrichment**: `ctx recall export` and `ctx journal enrich`
  write files relative to the current working directory. Enrichments
  created in a worktree stay there and are discarded on teardown.
  **Enrich journals on the main branch after merging**: the JSONL session
  logs are always intact, and you don't lose any data.

Tracked context files (*TASKS.md, DECISIONS.md, LEARNINGS.md,
CONVENTIONS.md*) work normally; `git` handles them.

## Tips

* **3-4 worktrees max.** Beyond that, merge complexity outweighs the
  parallelism benefit. The skill enforces this limit.
* **Group by package or directory**, not by priority. Two high-priority
  tasks that touch the same files must be in the same track.
* **`TASKS.md` will conflict** on merge. This is normal. Accept all `[x]`
  completions: The resolution is always additive.
* **Don't run `ctx init` in worktrees**. The `.context/` directory is
  tracked in git. Running init overwrites shared context files.
* **Name worktrees by concern**, not by number. `work/docs` and
  `work/crypto` are more useful than `work/track-1` and `work/track-2`.
* **Commit frequently** in each worktree. Smaller commits make merge
  conflicts easier to resolve.

## Next Up

Back to the beginning: **[Guide Your Agent →](guide-your-agent.md)**

Or explore the [full recipe list](index.md).

## See Also

* [Running an Unattended AI Agent](autonomous-loops.md): for serial
  autonomous loops instead of parallel tracks
* [Tracking Work Across Sessions](task-management.md): managing the
  task backlog that feeds into parallelization
* [The Complete Session](session-lifecycle.md): the complete session workflow
  end-to-end, with examples
