docs/recipes/webhook-notifications.md, before:

---
title: "Webhook Notifications"
icon: lucide/bell
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

## Problem

Your agent runs autonomously — loops, implements, releases — while you're away
from the terminal. You have no way to know when it finishes, hits a limit, or
when a hook fires a nudge.

**How do you get notified about agent activity without watching the terminal?**

## Commands and Skills Used

| Tool | Type | Purpose |
|------|------|---------|
| `ctx notify setup` | CLI command | Configure and encrypt webhook URL |
| `ctx notify test` | CLI command | Send a test notification |
| `ctx notify --event <name> "msg"` | CLI command | Send a notification from scripts/skills |
| `.ctxrc` `notify.events` | Configuration | Filter which events reach your webhook |

## The Workflow

### Step 1: Get a Webhook URL

Any service that accepts HTTP POST with JSON works. Common options:

| Service | How to get a URL |
|---------|------------------|
| **IFTTT** | Create an applet with the "Webhooks" trigger |
| **Slack** | Create an [Incoming Webhook](https://api.slack.com/messaging/webhooks) |
| **Discord** | Channel Settings > Integrations > Webhooks |
| **ntfy.sh** | Use `https://ntfy.sh/your-topic` (no signup) |
| **Pushover** | Use API endpoint with your user key |

The URL contains auth tokens. ctx encrypts it — it never appears in plaintext
in your repo.

### Step 2: Configure the Webhook

```bash
ctx notify setup
# Enter webhook URL: https://maker.ifttt.com/trigger/ctx/json/with/key/YOUR_KEY
# Webhook configured: https://maker.ifttt.com/***
# Encrypted at: .context/.notify.enc
```

This encrypts the URL with AES-256-GCM using the same key as the scratchpad
(`.context/.scratchpad.key`). The encrypted file (`.context/.notify.enc`) is
safe to commit. The key is gitignored.

### Step 3: Test It

```bash
ctx notify test
# Webhook responded: HTTP 200 OK
```

If you see `No webhook configured`, run `ctx notify setup` first.

### Step 4: Configure Events

Notifications are opt-in: no events are sent unless you configure an event
list in `.ctxrc`:

```yaml
# .ctxrc
notify:
  events:
    - loop       # loop completion or max-iteration hit
    - nudge      # VERBATIM relay hooks (context checkpoint, persistence, etc.)
    - relay      # all hook output (verbose, for debugging)
```

Only listed events fire. Omitting an event silently drops it.

### Step 5: Use in Your Own Skills

Add `ctx notify` calls to any skill or script:

```bash
# In a release skill
ctx notify --event release "v1.2.0 released successfully" 2>/dev/null || true

# In a backup script
ctx notify --event backup "Nightly backup completed" 2>/dev/null || true
```

The `2>/dev/null || true` suffix ensures the notification never breaks your
script — if there's no webhook or the HTTP call fails, it's a silent noop.

## Event Types

ctx fires these events automatically:

| Event | Source | When |
|-------|--------|------|
| `loop` | Loop script | Loop completes or hits max iterations |
| `nudge` | System hooks | VERBATIM relay nudge is emitted (context checkpoint, persistence, ceremonies, journal, resources, knowledge, version) |
| `relay` | System hooks | Any hook output (VERBATIM relays, agent directives, block responses) |
| `test` | `ctx notify test` | Manual test notification |
| *(custom)* | Your skills | You wire `ctx notify --event <name>` in your own scripts |

**`nudge` vs `relay`**: The `nudge` event fires only for VERBATIM relay hooks
(the ones the agent is instructed to show verbatim). The `relay` event fires
for *all* hook output — VERBATIM relays, agent directives, and hard gates.
Subscribe to `relay` for debugging ("did the agent get the post-commit nudge?"),
`nudge` for user-facing assurance ("was the checkpoint emitted?").

## Payload Format

Every notification sends a JSON POST:

```json
{
  "event": "loop",
  "message": "Loop completed after 5 iterations",
  "session_id": "abc123-...",
  "timestamp": "2026-02-22T14:30:00Z",
  "project": "ctx"
}
```

## Security Model

| Component | Location | Committed? | Permissions |
|-----------|----------|------------|-------------|
| Encryption key | `.context/.scratchpad.key` | No (gitignored) | `0600` |
| Encrypted URL | `.context/.notify.enc` | Yes (safe) | `0600` |
| Webhook URL | Never on disk in plaintext | N/A | N/A |

The key is shared with the scratchpad. If you rotate the scratchpad key,
re-run `ctx notify setup` to re-encrypt the webhook URL with the new key.

## Key Rotation

ctx checks the age of `.context/.scratchpad.key` once per day. If it's older
than 90 days (configurable via `notify.key_rotation_days`), a VERBATIM nudge
is emitted suggesting rotation.

```yaml
# .ctxrc
notify:
  key_rotation_days: 30   # nudge sooner (default: 90)
```

## Worktrees

The webhook URL is encrypted with the same key as the scratchpad
(`.context/.scratchpad.key`), which is gitignored. In a git worktree,
the key is absent — notifications silently do nothing.

This means **agents running in worktrees cannot send webhook alerts**.
For autonomous runs where worktree agents are opaque, monitor them from
the terminal rather than relying on webhooks. Enrich journals and review
results on the main branch after merging.

## Tips

* **Fire-and-forget**: Notifications never block. HTTP errors are silently
  ignored. No retry, no response parsing.
* **No webhook = no cost**: When no webhook is configured, `ctx notify` exits
  immediately. System hooks that call `notify.Send()` add zero overhead.
* **Multiple projects**: Each project has its own `.notify.enc`. You can point
  different projects at different webhooks.
* **Event filter is per-project**: Configure `notify.events` in each project's
  `.ctxrc` independently.

## Next Up

**[Detecting and Fixing Drift →](context-health.md)**: Keep context
files accurate as your codebase evolves.

## See Also

* [CLI Reference: ctx notify](../reference/cli-reference.md#ctx-notify):
  full command reference
* [Configuration](../home/configuration.md): `.ctxrc` settings including
  `notify` options
* [Running an Unattended AI Agent](autonomous-loops.md): how loops work
  and how notifications fit in
* [Hook Output Patterns](hook-output-patterns.md): understanding VERBATIM
  relays, agent directives, and hard gates

Commit message:

feat: header rebrand, remind/map features, shell-to-go hooks, docs overhaul
Header rebrand:
- Rename ASCII art header from "Context:" to "ctx:" across all
  source files, LICENSE, and README (~300 files, mechanical)

New features:
- Add `ctx remind` command and ctx-remind skill for session reminders
- Add ctx-map skill for architecture mapping with staleness tracking
- Add drift detector check for undocumented internal/ packages
- Add config migration support (internal/config/migrate.go)

Shell hooks → Go migration:
- Delete .claude/hooks/block-dangerous-commands.sh and check-backup-age.sh
- Add Go equivalents: block_dangerous_commands.go, check_backup_age.go,
  check_map_staleness.go, check_reminders.go (with tests)
- Register new subcommands in system.go
- Add shell-hooks-to-go migration spec

Documentation:
- Overhaul configuration, recipes, and reference docs
- Add session-reminders recipe
- Update CLI reference with new commands
- Refresh all site/ HTML output
- Update prompting guide, session lifecycle, knowledge capture,
  multi-tool setup, scratchpad, ceremonies, and more

Context files:
- Update ARCHITECTURE.md, DECISIONS.md, LEARNINGS.md, TASKS.md
- Add DETAILED_DESIGN.md and map-tracking.json

Misc:
- Update hooks.json with new hook registrations
- Enhance ctx-drift, ctx-journal-enrich, ctx-pad, ctx-worktree skills
- Update notify setup, pad store, journal parse/types
- Add detect-ai-typography.sh hack script
- Add specs: ctx-map.md, remind.md, rss-feed.md
- Update .gitignore, .ctxrc, zensical.toml

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/recipes/webhook-notifications.md, after:

---
title: "Webhook Notifications"
icon: lucide/bell
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

## The Problem

Your agent runs autonomously — loops, implements, releases — while you're away
from the terminal. You have no way to know when it finishes, hits a limit, or
when a hook fires a nudge.

**How do you get notified about agent activity without watching the terminal?**

## TL;DR

```bash
ctx notify setup                    # configure webhook URL (encrypted)
ctx notify test                     # verify delivery
# Hooks auto-notify on: session-end, loop-iteration, resource-danger
```

## Commands and Skills Used

| Tool | Type | Purpose |
|------|------|---------|
| `ctx notify setup` | CLI command | Configure and encrypt webhook URL |
| `ctx notify test` | CLI command | Send a test notification |
| `ctx notify --event <name> "msg"` | CLI command | Send a notification from scripts/skills |
| `.ctxrc` `notify.events` | Configuration | Filter which events reach your webhook |

## The Workflow

### Step 1: Get a Webhook URL

Any service that accepts HTTP POST with JSON works. Common options:

| Service | How to get a URL |
|---------|------------------|
| **IFTTT** | Create an applet with the "Webhooks" trigger |
| **Slack** | Create an [Incoming Webhook](https://api.slack.com/messaging/webhooks) |
| **Discord** | Channel Settings > Integrations > Webhooks |
| **ntfy.sh** | Use `https://ntfy.sh/your-topic` (no signup) |
| **Pushover** | Use API endpoint with your user key |

The URL contains auth tokens. ctx encrypts it — it never appears in plaintext
in your repo.

### Step 2: Configure the Webhook

```bash
ctx notify setup
# Enter webhook URL: https://maker.ifttt.com/trigger/ctx/json/with/key/YOUR_KEY
# Webhook configured: https://maker.ifttt.com/***
# Encrypted at: .context/.notify.enc
```

This encrypts the URL with AES-256-GCM using the same key as the scratchpad
(`.context/.context.key`). The encrypted file (`.context/.notify.enc`) is
safe to commit. The key is gitignored.

### Step 3: Test It

```bash
ctx notify test
# Webhook responded: HTTP 200 OK
```

If you see `No webhook configured`, run `ctx notify setup` first.

### Step 4: Configure Events

Notifications are opt-in: no events are sent unless you configure an event
list in `.ctxrc`:

```yaml
# .ctxrc
notify:
  events:
    - loop       # loop completion or max-iteration hit
    - nudge      # VERBATIM relay hooks (context checkpoint, persistence, etc.)
    - relay      # all hook output (verbose, for debugging)
```

Only listed events fire. Omitting an event silently drops it.

### Step 5: Use in Your Own Skills

Add `ctx notify` calls to any skill or script:

```bash
# In a release skill
ctx notify --event release "v1.2.0 released successfully" 2>/dev/null || true

# In a backup script
ctx notify --event backup "Nightly backup completed" 2>/dev/null || true
```

The `2>/dev/null || true` suffix ensures the notification never breaks your
script — if there's no webhook or the HTTP call fails, it's a silent noop.

## Event Types

ctx fires these events automatically:

| Event | Source | When |
|-------|--------|------|
| `loop` | Loop script | Loop completes or hits max iterations |
| `nudge` | System hooks | VERBATIM relay nudge is emitted (context checkpoint, persistence, ceremonies, journal, resources, knowledge, version) |
| `relay` | System hooks | Any hook output (VERBATIM relays, agent directives, block responses) |
| `test` | `ctx notify test` | Manual test notification |
| *(custom)* | Your skills | You wire `ctx notify --event <name>` in your own scripts |

**`nudge` vs `relay`**: The `nudge` event fires only for VERBATIM relay hooks
(the ones the agent is instructed to show verbatim). The `relay` event fires
for *all* hook output — VERBATIM relays, agent directives, and hard gates.
Subscribe to `relay` for debugging ("did the agent get the post-commit nudge?"),
`nudge` for user-facing assurance ("was the checkpoint emitted?").

## Payload Format

Every notification sends a JSON POST:

```json
{
  "event": "loop",
  "message": "Loop completed after 5 iterations",
  "session_id": "abc123-...",
  "timestamp": "2026-02-22T14:30:00Z",
  "project": "ctx"
}
```

## Security Model

| Component | Location | Committed? | Permissions |
|-----------|----------|------------|-------------|
| Encryption key | `.context/.context.key` | No (gitignored) | `0600` |
| Encrypted URL | `.context/.notify.enc` | Yes (safe) | `0600` |
| Webhook URL | Never on disk in plaintext | N/A | N/A |

The key is shared with the scratchpad. If you rotate the encryption key,
re-run `ctx notify setup` to re-encrypt the webhook URL with the new key.

## Key Rotation

ctx checks the age of `.context/.context.key` once per day. If it's older
than 90 days (configurable via `notify.key_rotation_days`), a VERBATIM nudge
is emitted suggesting rotation.

```yaml
# .ctxrc
notify:
  key_rotation_days: 30   # nudge sooner (default: 90)
```

## Worktrees

The webhook URL is encrypted with the same encryption key
(`.context/.context.key`), which is gitignored. In a git worktree,
the key is absent — notifications silently do nothing.

This means **agents running in worktrees cannot send webhook alerts**.
For autonomous runs where worktree agents are opaque, monitor them from
the terminal rather than relying on webhooks. Enrich journals and review
results on the main branch after merging.

## Tips

* **Fire-and-forget**: Notifications never block. HTTP errors are silently
  ignored. No retry, no response parsing.
* **No webhook = no cost**: When no webhook is configured, `ctx notify` exits
  immediately. System hooks that call `notify.Send()` add zero overhead.
* **Multiple projects**: Each project has its own `.notify.enc`. You can point
  different projects at different webhooks.
* **Event filter is per-project**: Configure `notify.events` in each project's
  `.ctxrc` independently.

## Next Up

**[Detecting and Fixing Drift →](context-health.md)**: Keep context
files accurate as your codebase evolves.

## See Also

* [CLI Reference: ctx notify](../reference/cli-reference.md#ctx-notify):
  full command reference
* [Configuration](../home/configuration.md): `.ctxrc` settings including
  `notify` options
* [Running an Unattended AI Agent](autonomous-loops.md): how loops work
  and how notifications fit in
* [Hook Output Patterns](hook-output-patterns.md): understanding VERBATIM
  relays, agent directives, and hard gates
