docs/community.md, before:

---
#   /    Context:                     https://ctx.ist
# ,'`./    do you remember?
# `.,'\
#   \    Copyright 2026-present Context contributors.
#                 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

title: Join the ctx Community
icon: lucide/heart-handshake
---

**Open source is better together**.

!!! tip "Help `ctx` Change How AI Remembers"
    **If the idea behind `ctx` resonates, a star helps it reach engineers
    who run into context drift every day.**

    → https://github.com/ActiveMemory/ctx

    `ctx` is free and open source software, and **contributions are always
    welcome** and appreciated.

Join the community to ask questions, share feedback, and connect with
other users:

- [:fontawesome-brands-stack-exchange: **IRC**](https://web.libera.chat/#ctx):
   join `#ctx` on `irc.libera.chat`
- [:fontawesome-brands-github: **GitHub**](https://github.com/ActiveMemory/ctx):
  Star the repo, report issues, contribute

----

**Ready to contribute code?** See [Contributing to ctx →](contributing.md)

Commit message:

chore: docs refresh, lint fixes, and regenerated site
Docs: reorganize about, community, contributing, getting-started,
common-workflows, first-session, is-ctx-right. Update enrich-all
skill to remove normalize-first prerequisite.

Code: minor lint fixes across journal, drift, initialize, recall,
learnings, and config packages. Remove unused labels, fix test
assertions, update copyright headers.

Site: regenerate all HTML from updated docs source.

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/community.md, after:

---
#   /    Context:                     https://ctx.ist
# ,'`./    do you remember?
# `.,'\
#   \    Copyright 2026-present Context contributors.
#                 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

title: "#ctx"
icon: lucide/heart-handshake
---

![ctx](images/ctx-banner.png)

**Open source is better together**.

We are the builders who care about **durable** context, **verifiable** decisions, and
human–AI workflows that **compound** over time.

!!! tip "Help `ctx` Change How AI Remembers"
    If the idea behind `ctx` resonates, a star helps it reach engineers
    who run into context drift every day.

    [:fontawesome-brands-github: Star `ctx` on GitHub](https://github.com/ActiveMemory/ctx) ⭐

    `ctx` is free and open source software, and **contributions are always
    welcome** and appreciated.

Join the community to ask questions, share feedback, and connect with
other users:

* [:fontawesome-brands-stack-exchange: **IRC**](https://web.libera.chat/#ctx)<br>
  [join `#ctx` on `irc.libera.chat`](https://web.libera.chat/#ctx)<br>
  Real-time discussion, field notes, and early ideas.
* [:fontawesome-brands-github: Read the `ctx` Source on GitHub](https://github.com/ActiveMemory/ctx)<br>
  Issues, discussions, and contributions.

----

Early adopters shape the conventions.

**Want to contribute?** See [Contributing to ctx →](contributing.md)

----

**Code of Conduct**  

Clear context requires respectful collaboration.  

`ctx` follows the
[Contributor Covenant](https://github.com/ActiveMemory/ctx/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
