docs/reference/session-journal.md, before:

---
#   /    Context:                     https://ctx.ist
# ,'`./    do you remember?
# `.,'\
#   \    Copyright 2026-present Context contributors.
#                 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

title: Session Journal
icon: lucide/book-open
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

!!! danger "Important Security Note"

    Session journals contain **sensitive data** such as
    file contents, commands, API keys, internal discussions, 
    error messages with stack traces, and more. 
    
    The `.context/journal-site/` and `.context/journal-obsidian/`
    directories **MUST** be `.gitignore`d.

    * **DO NOT** host your journal publicly.
    * **DO NOT** commit your journal files to version control.

## Browse Your Session History

`ctx`'s **Session Journal** turns your AI coding sessions into a **browsable**, 
**searchable**, and **editable** archive.

## Quick Start

After using `ctx` for a couple of sessions, you can generate a 
journal site with:

```bash
# Export all sessions to markdown
ctx recall export --all

# Generate and serve the journal site
ctx journal site --serve
```

Then open [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000) to browse your sessions.

## What You Get

The Session Journal gives you:

* **Browsable history**: Navigate through all your AI sessions by date
* **Full conversations**: See every message, tool use, and result
* **Token usage**: Track how many tokens each session consumed
* **Search**: Find sessions by content, project, or date
* **Dark mode**: Easy on the eyes for late-night archaeology

Each session page includes the following sections:

| Section      | Content                                          |
|--------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Metadata     | Date, time, duration, model, project, git branch |
| Summary      | Space for your notes (editable)                  |
| Tool Usage   | Which tools were used and how often              |
| Conversation | Full transcript with timestamps                  |

## The Workflow

### 1. Export Sessions

```bash
# Export all sessions from current project (only new files)
ctx recall export --all

# Export sessions from all projects
ctx recall export --all --all-projects

# Export a specific session by ID (always writes)
ctx recall export abc123

# Preview what would be exported
ctx recall export --all --dry-run

# Re-export existing (regenerates conversation, preserves YAML frontmatter)
ctx recall export --all --regenerate

# Discard frontmatter during regeneration
ctx recall export --all --regenerate --keep-frontmatter=false -y
```

Exported sessions go to `.context/journal/` as editable Markdown files.

### 2. Generate the Site

```bash
# Generate site structure
ctx journal site

# Generate and build static HTML
ctx journal site --build

# Generate and serve locally
ctx journal site --serve

# Custom output directory
ctx journal site --output ~/my-journal
```

The site is generated in `.context/journal-site/` by default.

### 3. Browse and Search

Open [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000) after running `--serve`.

* Use the sidebar to navigate by date
* Use search (`/` key) to find specific content
* Click any session to see the full conversation

## Editing Sessions

Exported sessions are plain Markdown in `.context/journal/`. You can:

* **Add summaries**: Fill in the `## Summary` section
* **Add notes**: Insert your own commentary anywhere
* **Highlight key moments**: Use Markdown formatting
* **Delete noise**: Remove irrelevant tool outputs

After editing, regenerate the site:

```bash
ctx journal site --serve
```

!!! info "Safe by Default"
    Running `ctx recall export --all` **only exports new sessions**. Existing
    files are skipped entirely — your edits and enrichments are never touched.

    Use `--regenerate` to re-export existing files. Conversation content is
    regenerated, but YAML frontmatter (*topics, type, outcome, etc.*) is
    preserved. You'll be prompted before any existing files are overwritten;
    add `-y` to skip the prompt.

    Use `--keep-frontmatter=false` to discard enriched frontmatter during
    regeneration.

    Locked entries (via `ctx recall lock`) are always skipped, regardless
    of flags.

## Large Sessions

Sessions with many messages (200+) are automatically split into multiple parts 
for better browser performance. Navigation links connect the parts:

```
session-abc123.md      (Part 1 of 3)
session-abc123-p2.md   (Part 2 of 3)
session-abc123-p3.md   (Part 3 of 3)
```

## Suggestion Sessions

Claude Code generates "suggestion" sessions for auto-complete prompts. These 
are separated in the index under a "Suggestions" section to keep your main 
session list focused.

## Enriching Journal Entries

Raw exported sessions contain basic metadata (date, time, project) but lack the
structured information needed for effective search, filtering, and analysis.
**Journal enrichment** adds semantic metadata that transforms a flat archive into
a searchable knowledge base.

### Why Enrich?

Without enrichment, you have timestamps and raw conversations. With enrichment:

* **Find sessions by topic**: "Show me all auth-related sessions"
* **Filter by outcome**: "What did I abandon vs complete?"
* **Track technology usage**: "When did I last work with PostgreSQL?"
* **Identify key files**: Jump directly to the files discussed
* **Get summaries**: Understand what happened without reading transcripts

### The Frontmatter Schema

Enriched entries begin with YAML frontmatter:

```yaml
---
title: "Implement caching layer"
date: 2026-01-27
type: feature
outcome: completed
topics:
  - caching
  - performance
technologies:
  - go
  - redis
libraries:
  - go-redis/redis
key_files:
  - internal/cache/redis.go
  - internal/cache/memory.go
---
```

| Field          | Required | Description                                         |
|----------------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| `title`        | Yes      | Descriptive title (not the session slug)            |
| `date`         | Yes      | Session date (YYYY-MM-DD)                           |
| `type`         | Yes      | Session type (see below)                            |
| `outcome`      | Yes      | How the session ended (see below)                   |
| `topics`       | No       | Subject areas discussed                             |
| `technologies` | No       | Languages, databases, frameworks                    |
| `libraries`    | No       | Specific packages or libraries used                 |
| `key_files`    | No       | Important files created or modified                 |

**Type values:**

| Type            | When to use                              |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------|
| `feature`       | Building new functionality               |
| `bugfix`        | Fixing broken behavior                   |
| `refactor`      | Restructuring without behavior change    |
| `exploration`   | Research, learning, experimentation      |
| `debugging`     | Investigating issues                     |
| `documentation` | Writing docs, comments, README           |

**Outcome values:**

| Outcome     | Meaning                                     |
|-------------|---------------------------------------------|
| `completed` | Goal achieved                               |
| `partial`   | Some progress, work continues               |
| `abandoned` | Stopped pursuing this approach              |
| `blocked`   | Waiting on external dependency              |

### Using `/ctx-journal-enrich`

The `/ctx-journal-enrich` skill automates enrichment by analyzing conversation
content and proposing metadata.

**Invoke by session identifier:**

```
/ctx-journal-enrich twinkly-stirring-kettle
/ctx-journal-enrich twinkly
/ctx-journal-enrich 2026-01-24
/ctx-journal-enrich 76fe2ab9
```

The skill will:

1. Find the matching journal file
2. Read and analyze the conversation
3. Propose frontmatter (type, topics, outcome, technologies)
4. Generate a 2-3 sentence summary
5. Extract decisions, learnings, and tasks mentioned
6. Show a diff and ask for confirmation before writing

### Before and After

**Before enrichment:**

```markdown
# twinkly-stirring-kettle

**ID**: abc123-def456
**Date**: 2026-01-24
**Time**: 14:30:00
...

## Summary

[Add your summary of this session]

## Conversation
...
```

**After enrichment:**

```markdown
---
title: "Add Redis caching to API endpoints"
date: 2026-01-24
type: feature
outcome: completed
topics:
  - caching
  - api-performance
technologies:
  - go
  - redis
key_files:
  - internal/api/middleware/cache.go
  - internal/cache/redis.go
---

# twinkly-stirring-kettle

**ID**: abc123-def456
**Date**: 2026-01-24
**Time**: 14:30:00
...

## Summary

Implemented Redis-based caching middleware for frequently accessed API endpoints.
Added cache invalidation on writes and configurable TTL per route. Reduced
 the average response time from 200ms to 15ms for cached routes.

## Decisions

* Used Redis over in-memory cache for horizontal scaling
* Chose per-route TTL configuration over global setting

## Learnings

* Redis WATCH command prevents race conditions during cache invalidation

## Conversation
...
```

### Enrichment and Site Generation

The journal site generator uses enriched metadata for better organization:

* **Titles** appear in navigation instead of slugs
* **Summaries** provide context in the index
* **Topics** enable filtering (when using search)
* **Types** allow grouping by work category

Future improvements will add topic-based navigation and outcome filtering to
the generated site.

### Batch Enrichment

To enrich multiple sessions, process them one at a time:

```bash
# List unenriched sessions (those without frontmatter)
grep -L "^---$" .context/journal/*.md | head -10
```

Then run `/ctx-journal-enrich` on each. Enrichment is intentionally interactive
to ensure accuracy.

## Context Monitor

The **Context Monitor** (`context-watch.sh`) is a terminal-based tool that shows
real-time token usage for your active Claude Code session. Run it in a separate
terminal window to keep an eye on context consumption.

### Setup

After running `ctx init`, the monitor script is available at:

```bash
.context/tools/context-watch.sh
```

### Usage

```bash
# Default: refresh every 10 seconds
.context/tools/context-watch.sh

# Custom refresh interval (5 seconds)
.context/tools/context-watch.sh 5
```

The monitor displays:

* **Progress bar** with estimated token usage versus effective limit
* **Color-coded status**: green (healthy), yellow (monitor), red (save and end)
* **Session info**: file size, message count, last update time
* **Remaining tokens**: how much usable context is left

![`ctx watch`: Healthy](../images/watch-green.png)

![`ctx watch`: Unhealthy](../images/watch-red.png)

### How It Works

The monitor finds the most recently modified session `JSONL` in
`~/.claude/projects/`, estimates token count using a character-based heuristic
(~30 chars per token for JSON content), and adds an overhead estimate for system
prompts, tools, and skills that aren't in the JSONL.

| Constant           | Value   | Meaning                                    |
|--------------------|---------|--------------------------------------------|
| Model limit        | 200,000 | Claude's context window                    |
| Autocompact buffer | 33,000  | Reserved by Claude Code, not usable        |
| System overhead    | 20,000  | System prompt + tools + skills + memory    |
| Effective limit    | 167,000 | What you can actually use for conversation |

!!! tip "Pair with the context checkpoint hook"

    The monitor is for **manual observation**. For **automated alerts** within
    your session, the ctx plugin includes a `check-context-size` hook that
    triggers the `/ctx-context-monitor` skill at adaptive intervals.

## Obsidian Vault Export

If you use [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) for knowledge management, you can
export your journal as an Obsidian vault instead of (or alongside) the static
site:

```bash
ctx journal obsidian
```

This generates a vault in `.context/journal-obsidian/` with:

- **Wikilinks** (`[[target|display]]`) instead of Markdown links
- **MOC pages** (Map of Content) for topics, key files, and session types
- **Related sessions footer** per entry — links to entries sharing the same topics
- **Transformed frontmatter** — `topics` renamed to `tags` (Obsidian-recognized),
  `aliases` added from title for search
- **Graph-optimized structure** — MOC hubs + cross-linked entries create dense
  graph connectivity

To use: open the output directory in Obsidian ("Open folder as vault").

```bash
# Custom output directory
ctx journal obsidian --output ~/vaults/ctx-journal
```

!!! tip "Static site vs Obsidian vault"

    Use `ctx journal site` when you want a **web-browsable** archive with search
    and dark mode. Use `ctx journal obsidian` when you want **graph view**,
    **backlinks**, and **tag-based navigation** inside Obsidian. Both use the
    same enriched source entries — you can generate both.

## Full Pipeline

The complete journal workflow has four stages. Each is idempotent — safe to
re-run, and stages skip already-processed entries.

```
export → normalize → enrich → rebuild
```

| Stage         | Command / Skill            | What it does                            | Skips if                     |
|---------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| **Export**    | `ctx recall export --all`  | Converts session JSONL to Markdown      | File already exists (safe default) |
| **Normalize** | `/ctx-journal-normalize`   | Fixes fence nesting and metadata tables | `<!-- normalized -->` marker |
| **Enrich**    | `/ctx-journal-enrich`      | Adds frontmatter, summaries, topics     | Frontmatter already present  |
| **Rebuild**   | `ctx journal site --build` | Generates static HTML site              | —                            |
| **Obsidian**  | `ctx journal obsidian`     | Generates Obsidian vault with wikilinks | —                            |

### Using `make journal`

If your project includes `Makefile.ctx` (deployed by `ctx init`), the first
and last stages are combined:

```bash
make journal           # export + rebuild
```

After it runs, it reminds you to normalize and enrich in Claude Code:

```
Next steps (in Claude Code):
  1. /ctx-journal-normalize  — fix markdown rendering (skips already normalized)
  2. /ctx-journal-enrich     — add metadata per entry (skips if frontmatter exists)

Then re-run: make journal
```

### Normalizing Journal Entries

Raw exported sessions may have rendering issues: nested code fences,
malformed metadata blocks, or broken lists. The `/ctx-journal-normalize`
skill fixes these in the **source files** so the site renders correctly.

```
/ctx-journal-normalize
```

It backs up `.context/journal/` before modifying anything, and marks processed
files with `<!-- normalized: YYYY-MM-DD -->` so re-runs skip them.

**Run normalize before enrich** — the enrichment skill reads conversation
content, and clean markdown produces better metadata extraction.

## Tips

**Daily workflow:**
```bash
# Export, browse, then enrich in Claude Code
make journal && make journal-serve
# Then in Claude Code: /ctx-journal-enrich <session>
```

**After a productive session:**
```bash
# Export just that session and add notes
ctx recall export <session-id>
# Edit .context/journal/<session>.md
# Regenerate: ctx journal site
```

**Searching across all sessions:**
```bash
# Use grep on the journal directory
grep -r "authentication" .context/journal/
```

## Requirements

The journal site uses [zensical](https://pypi.org/project/zensical/) for static site generation:

```bash
pipx install zensical
```

!!! warn "Use pipx for zensical"
    `pip install zensical` may install a non-functional stub on
    system Python 3.9. 

    Use `pipx install zensical` instead, which creates an
    isolated environment and handles Python version management automatically.

    This issue especially happens on *Mac OSX*.

## See Also

* [`ctx recall`](cli-reference.md#ctx-recall): Session discovery and listing
* [`ctx journal site`](cli-reference.md#ctx-journal-site): Static site generation
* [`ctx journal obsidian`](cli-reference.md#ctx-journal-obsidian): Obsidian vault export
* [Context Files](../home/context-files.md): The `.context/` directory structure

Commit message:

feat: add `ctx recall sync` for frontmatter-to-state lock sync
Adds a sister command to `ctx recall lock` that scans journal markdowns
and syncs their frontmatter lock state into .state.json. This supports
the enrichment workflow where users add `locked: true` to frontmatter
manually, then sweep all files to propagate state.

Also includes pre-existing doc updates, site regeneration, new
system-hooks-audit recipe, and recipes-nav-subgroups spec.

Signed-off-by: Jose Alekhinne <alekhinejose@gmail.com>

docs/reference/session-journal.md, after:

---
#   /    Context:                     https://ctx.ist
# ,'`./    do you remember?
# `.,'\
#   \    Copyright 2026-present Context contributors.
#                 SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

title: Session Journal
icon: lucide/book-open
---

![ctx](../images/ctx-banner.png)

!!! danger "Important Security Note"

    Session journals contain **sensitive data** such as
    file contents, commands, API keys, internal discussions, 
    error messages with stack traces, and more. 
    
    The `.context/journal-site/` and `.context/journal-obsidian/`
    directories **MUST** be `.gitignore`d.

    * **DO NOT** host your journal publicly.
    * **DO NOT** commit your journal files to version control.

## Browse Your Session History

`ctx`'s **Session Journal** turns your AI coding sessions into a **browsable**, 
**searchable**, and **editable** archive.

## Quick Start

After using `ctx` for a couple of sessions, you can generate a 
journal site with:

```bash
# Export all sessions to markdown
ctx recall export --all

# Generate and serve the journal site
ctx journal site --serve
```

Then open [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000) to browse your sessions.

## What You Get

The Session Journal gives you:

* **Browsable history**: Navigate through all your AI sessions by date
* **Full conversations**: See every message, tool use, and result
* **Token usage**: Track how many tokens each session consumed
* **Search**: Find sessions by content, project, or date
* **Dark mode**: Easy on the eyes for late-night archaeology

Each session page includes the following sections:

| Section      | Content                                          |
|--------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Metadata     | Date, time, duration, model, project, git branch |
| Summary      | Space for your notes (editable)                  |
| Tool Usage   | Which tools were used and how often              |
| Conversation | Full transcript with timestamps                  |

## The Workflow

### 1. Export Sessions

```bash
# Export all sessions from current project (only new files)
ctx recall export --all

# Export sessions from all projects
ctx recall export --all --all-projects

# Export a specific session by ID (always writes)
ctx recall export abc123

# Preview what would be exported
ctx recall export --all --dry-run

# Re-export existing (regenerates conversation, preserves YAML frontmatter)
ctx recall export --all --regenerate

# Discard frontmatter during regeneration
ctx recall export --all --regenerate --keep-frontmatter=false -y
```

Exported sessions go to `.context/journal/` as editable Markdown files.

### 2. Generate the Site

```bash
# Generate site structure
ctx journal site

# Generate and build static HTML
ctx journal site --build

# Generate and serve locally
ctx journal site --serve

# Custom output directory
ctx journal site --output ~/my-journal
```

The site is generated in `.context/journal-site/` by default.

### 3. Browse and Search

Open [http://localhost:8000](http://localhost:8000) after running `--serve`.

* Use the sidebar to navigate by date
* Use search (`/` key) to find specific content
* Click any session to see the full conversation

## Editing Sessions

Exported sessions are plain Markdown in `.context/journal/`. You can:

* **Add summaries**: Fill in the `## Summary` section
* **Add notes**: Insert your own commentary anywhere
* **Highlight key moments**: Use Markdown formatting
* **Delete noise**: Remove irrelevant tool outputs

After editing, regenerate the site:

```bash
ctx journal site --serve
```

!!! info "Safe by Default"
    Running `ctx recall export --all` **only exports new sessions**. Existing
    files are skipped entirely — your edits and enrichments are never touched.

    Use `--regenerate` to re-export existing files. Conversation content is
    regenerated, but YAML frontmatter (*topics, type, outcome, etc.*) is
    preserved. You'll be prompted before any existing files are overwritten;
    add `-y` to skip the prompt.

    Use `--keep-frontmatter=false` to discard enriched frontmatter during
    regeneration.

    Locked entries (via `ctx recall lock`) are always skipped, regardless
    of flags. If you prefer to add `locked: true` to frontmatter during
    enrichment, run `ctx recall sync` to propagate the lock state to
    `.state.json`.

## Large Sessions

Sessions with many messages (200+) are automatically split into multiple parts 
for better browser performance. Navigation links connect the parts:

```
session-abc123.md      (Part 1 of 3)
session-abc123-p2.md   (Part 2 of 3)
session-abc123-p3.md   (Part 3 of 3)
```

## Suggestion Sessions

Claude Code generates "suggestion" sessions for auto-complete prompts. These 
are separated in the index under a "Suggestions" section to keep your main 
session list focused.

## Enriching Journal Entries

Raw exported sessions contain basic metadata (date, time, project) but lack the
structured information needed for effective search, filtering, and analysis.
**Journal enrichment** adds semantic metadata that transforms a flat archive into
a searchable knowledge base.

### Why Enrich?

Without enrichment, you have timestamps and raw conversations. With enrichment:

* **Find sessions by topic**: "Show me all auth-related sessions"
* **Filter by outcome**: "What did I abandon vs complete?"
* **Track technology usage**: "When did I last work with PostgreSQL?"
* **Identify key files**: Jump directly to the files discussed
* **Get summaries**: Understand what happened without reading transcripts

### The Frontmatter Schema

Enriched entries begin with YAML frontmatter:

```yaml
---
title: "Implement caching layer"
date: 2026-01-27
type: feature
outcome: completed
topics:
  - caching
  - performance
technologies:
  - go
  - redis
libraries:
  - go-redis/redis
key_files:
  - internal/cache/redis.go
  - internal/cache/memory.go
---
```

| Field          | Required | Description                                         |
|----------------|----------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| `title`        | Yes      | Descriptive title (not the session slug)            |
| `date`         | Yes      | Session date (YYYY-MM-DD)                           |
| `type`         | Yes      | Session type (see below)                            |
| `outcome`      | Yes      | How the session ended (see below)                   |
| `topics`       | No       | Subject areas discussed                             |
| `technologies` | No       | Languages, databases, frameworks                    |
| `libraries`    | No       | Specific packages or libraries used                 |
| `key_files`    | No       | Important files created or modified                 |

**Type values:**

| Type            | When to use                              |
|-----------------|------------------------------------------|
| `feature`       | Building new functionality               |
| `bugfix`        | Fixing broken behavior                   |
| `refactor`      | Restructuring without behavior change    |
| `exploration`   | Research, learning, experimentation      |
| `debugging`     | Investigating issues                     |
| `documentation` | Writing docs, comments, README           |

**Outcome values:**

| Outcome     | Meaning                                     |
|-------------|---------------------------------------------|
| `completed` | Goal achieved                               |
| `partial`   | Some progress, work continues               |
| `abandoned` | Stopped pursuing this approach              |
| `blocked`   | Waiting on external dependency              |

### Using `/ctx-journal-enrich`

The `/ctx-journal-enrich` skill automates enrichment by analyzing conversation
content and proposing metadata.

**Invoke by session identifier:**

```
/ctx-journal-enrich twinkly-stirring-kettle
/ctx-journal-enrich twinkly
/ctx-journal-enrich 2026-01-24
/ctx-journal-enrich 76fe2ab9
```

The skill will:

1. Find the matching journal file
2. Read and analyze the conversation
3. Propose frontmatter (type, topics, outcome, technologies)
4. Generate a 2-3 sentence summary
5. Extract decisions, learnings, and tasks mentioned
6. Show a diff and ask for confirmation before writing

### Before and After

**Before enrichment:**

```markdown
# twinkly-stirring-kettle

**ID**: abc123-def456
**Date**: 2026-01-24
**Time**: 14:30:00
...

## Summary

[Add your summary of this session]

## Conversation
...
```

**After enrichment:**

```markdown
---
title: "Add Redis caching to API endpoints"
date: 2026-01-24
type: feature
outcome: completed
topics:
  - caching
  - api-performance
technologies:
  - go
  - redis
key_files:
  - internal/api/middleware/cache.go
  - internal/cache/redis.go
---

# twinkly-stirring-kettle

**ID**: abc123-def456
**Date**: 2026-01-24
**Time**: 14:30:00
...

## Summary

Implemented Redis-based caching middleware for frequently accessed API endpoints.
Added cache invalidation on writes and configurable TTL per route. Reduced
 the average response time from 200ms to 15ms for cached routes.

## Decisions

* Used Redis over in-memory cache for horizontal scaling
* Chose per-route TTL configuration over global setting

## Learnings

* Redis WATCH command prevents race conditions during cache invalidation

## Conversation
...
```

### Enrichment and Site Generation

The journal site generator uses enriched metadata for better organization:

* **Titles** appear in navigation instead of slugs
* **Summaries** provide context in the index
* **Topics** enable filtering (when using search)
* **Types** allow grouping by work category

Future improvements will add topic-based navigation and outcome filtering to
the generated site.

### Batch Enrichment

To enrich multiple sessions, process them one at a time:

```bash
# List unenriched sessions (those without frontmatter)
grep -L "^---$" .context/journal/*.md | head -10
```

Then run `/ctx-journal-enrich` on each. Enrichment is intentionally interactive
to ensure accuracy.

## Context Monitor

The **Context Monitor** (`context-watch.sh`) is a terminal-based tool that shows
real-time token usage for your active Claude Code session. Run it in a separate
terminal window to keep an eye on context consumption.

### Setup

After running `ctx init`, the monitor script is available at:

```bash
.context/tools/context-watch.sh
```

### Usage

```bash
# Default: refresh every 10 seconds
.context/tools/context-watch.sh

# Custom refresh interval (5 seconds)
.context/tools/context-watch.sh 5
```

The monitor displays:

* **Progress bar** with estimated token usage versus effective limit
* **Color-coded status**: green (healthy), yellow (monitor), red (save and end)
* **Session info**: file size, message count, last update time
* **Remaining tokens**: how much usable context is left

![`ctx watch`: Healthy](../images/watch-green.png)

![`ctx watch`: Unhealthy](../images/watch-red.png)

### How It Works

The monitor finds the most recently modified session `JSONL` in
`~/.claude/projects/`, estimates token count using a character-based heuristic
(~30 chars per token for JSON content), and adds an overhead estimate for system
prompts, tools, and skills that aren't in the JSONL.

| Constant           | Value   | Meaning                                    |
|--------------------|---------|--------------------------------------------|
| Model limit        | 200,000 | Claude's context window                    |
| Autocompact buffer | 33,000  | Reserved by Claude Code, not usable        |
| System overhead    | 20,000  | System prompt + tools + skills + memory    |
| Effective limit    | 167,000 | What you can actually use for conversation |

!!! tip "Pair with the context checkpoint hook"

    The monitor is for **manual observation**. For **automated alerts** within
    your session, the ctx plugin includes a `check-context-size` hook that
    triggers the `/ctx-context-monitor` skill at adaptive intervals.

## Obsidian Vault Export

If you use [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) for knowledge management, you can
export your journal as an Obsidian vault instead of (or alongside) the static
site:

```bash
ctx journal obsidian
```

This generates a vault in `.context/journal-obsidian/` with:

- **Wikilinks** (`[[target|display]]`) instead of Markdown links
- **MOC pages** (Map of Content) for topics, key files, and session types
- **Related sessions footer** per entry — links to entries sharing the same topics
- **Transformed frontmatter** — `topics` renamed to `tags` (Obsidian-recognized),
  `aliases` added from title for search
- **Graph-optimized structure** — MOC hubs + cross-linked entries create dense
  graph connectivity

To use: open the output directory in Obsidian ("Open folder as vault").

```bash
# Custom output directory
ctx journal obsidian --output ~/vaults/ctx-journal
```

!!! tip "Static site vs Obsidian vault"

    Use `ctx journal site` when you want a **web-browsable** archive with search
    and dark mode. Use `ctx journal obsidian` when you want **graph view**,
    **backlinks**, and **tag-based navigation** inside Obsidian. Both use the
    same enriched source entries — you can generate both.

## Full Pipeline

The complete journal workflow has four stages. Each is idempotent — safe to
re-run, and stages skip already-processed entries.

```
export → normalize → enrich → rebuild
```

| Stage         | Command / Skill            | What it does                            | Skips if                     |
|---------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------------|
| **Export**    | `ctx recall export --all`  | Converts session JSONL to Markdown      | File already exists (safe default) |
| **Normalize** | `/ctx-journal-normalize`   | Fixes fence nesting and metadata tables | `<!-- normalized -->` marker |
| **Enrich**    | `/ctx-journal-enrich`      | Adds frontmatter, summaries, topics     | Frontmatter already present  |
| **Rebuild**   | `ctx journal site --build` | Generates static HTML site              | —                            |
| **Obsidian**  | `ctx journal obsidian`     | Generates Obsidian vault with wikilinks | —                            |

### Using `make journal`

If your project includes `Makefile.ctx` (deployed by `ctx init`), the first
and last stages are combined:

```bash
make journal           # export + rebuild
```

After it runs, it reminds you to normalize and enrich in Claude Code:

```
Next steps (in Claude Code):
  1. /ctx-journal-normalize  — fix markdown rendering (skips already normalized)
  2. /ctx-journal-enrich     — add metadata per entry (skips if frontmatter exists)

Then re-run: make journal
```

### Normalizing Journal Entries

Raw exported sessions may have rendering issues: nested code fences,
malformed metadata blocks, or broken lists. The `/ctx-journal-normalize`
skill fixes these in the **source files** so the site renders correctly.

```
/ctx-journal-normalize
```

It backs up `.context/journal/` before modifying anything, and marks processed
files with `<!-- normalized: YYYY-MM-DD -->` so re-runs skip them.

**Run normalize before enrich** — the enrichment skill reads conversation
content, and clean markdown produces better metadata extraction.

## Tips

**Daily workflow:**
```bash
# Export, browse, then enrich in Claude Code
make journal && make journal-serve
# Then in Claude Code: /ctx-journal-enrich <session>
```

**After a productive session:**
```bash
# Export just that session and add notes
ctx recall export <session-id>
# Edit .context/journal/<session>.md
# Regenerate: ctx journal site
```

**Searching across all sessions:**
```bash
# Use grep on the journal directory
grep -r "authentication" .context/journal/
```

## Requirements

The journal site uses [zensical](https://pypi.org/project/zensical/) for static site generation:

```bash
pipx install zensical
```

!!! warn "Use pipx for zensical"
    `pip install zensical` may install a non-functional stub on
    system Python 3.9. 

    Use `pipx install zensical` instead, which creates an
    isolated environment and handles Python version management automatically.

    This issue especially happens on *Mac OSX*.

## See Also

* [`ctx recall`](cli-reference.md#ctx-recall): Session discovery and listing
* [`ctx journal site`](cli-reference.md#ctx-journal-site): Static site generation
* [`ctx journal obsidian`](cli-reference.md#ctx-journal-obsidian): Obsidian vault export
* [Context Files](../home/context-files.md): The `.context/` directory structure
